---
title: Peeragogy Handbook
---

# Foreword

I was invited to lecture at UC Berkeley in January, 2012, and to involve
their faculty and their graduate students in some kind of seminar, so [I
told the story of how I’ve used social media in teaching and
learning](http://vimeo.com/35685124) - and invited them to help me
create a handbook for self-learners.

I called it the Peeragogy Handbook. I met twice on the Berkeley campus
in the weeks following the lecture with about a dozen Berkeley faculty
and graduate students. We also had a laptop open with Elluminate, an
online platform that enabled video chatting and text chat, enabling
people around the world who were interested in the subject, who I
recruited through Twitter and email, to also participate in this
conversation. All of the faculty and grad students at Berkeley dropped
out of the project, but we ended up with about two dozen people, most of
them educators, several of them students, in Canada, Belgium, Brazil,
Germany, Italy, Mexico, the UK, USA, and Venezuela who ended up
collaborating on a voluntary effort to create this Peeragogy Handbook,
at [peeragogy.org](http://peeragogy.org/). We all shared an interest in
the question: “If you give more and more of your power as a teacher to
the students, can’t you just eliminate the teacher all together, or
can’t people take turns being the facilitator of the class?”

Between the time nine years ago, when I started out using social media
in teaching and learning, clearly there’s been an explosion of people
learning things together online via Wikipedia and YouTube, MOOCs and
Quora, Twitter and Facebook, Google Docs and video chat, and I don’t
really know what’s going to happen with the institutions, but I do know
that this wild learning is happening and that some people are becoming
more expert at it.

I started trying to learn programming this summer, and I think that
learning programming and doing programming must be very, very different
now from before the Web, because now, if you know the right question to
ask, and you put it into a search query, there’s someone out there on
StackOverflow who is already discussing it. More and more people are
getting savvy to the fact that you don’t have to go to a university to
have access to all of the materials, plus media that the universities
haven’t even had until recently. What’s missing for learners outside
formal institutions who know how to use social media is useful lore
about how people learn together without a teacher. Nobody should ever
overlook the fact that there are great teachers. Teachers should be
trained, rewarded, and sought out. But it’s time to expand the focus on
learners, particularly on self-learners whose hunger for learning hasn’t
been schooled out of them.

I think that we’re beginning to see the next step, which is to develop
the methods – we certainly have the technologies, accessible at the cost
of broadband access – for self-learners to teach and learn from each
other more effectively. Self-learners know how to go to YouTube, they
know how to use search, mobilize personal learning networks. How does a
group of self-learners organize co-learning?

In the Peeragogy project, we started with a
[wiki](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy/) and then we
decided that we needed to have a mechanism for people who were
self-electing to write articles on the wiki to say, OK, this is ready
for editing, and then for an editor to come in and say, this is ready
for Wordpress, and then for someone to say, this has been moved to
WordPress. We used a forum to hash out these issues and met often via
Elluminate, which enabled us to all use audio and video, to share
screens, to text-chat, and to simultaneously draw on a whiteboard. We
tried Piratepad for a while. Eventually we settled on WordPress as our
publication platform and moved our most of our discussions to Google+.
It was a messy process, learning to work together while deciding what,
exactly it was we were doing and how we were going to go about it. In
the end we ended up evolving methods and settled on tools that worked
pretty well. We tackled key questions and provided resources for dealing
with them: How you want to govern your learning community? What kinds of
technologies do you want to use, and why, and how to use them? How are
learners going to convene, what kind of resources are available, and are
those resources free or what are their advantages and disadvantages. We
were betting that if we could organize good responses to all these
questions, a resource would prove to be useful: Here’s a resource on how
to organize a syllabus or a learning space, and here are a lot of
suggestions for good learning activities, and here’s why I should use a
wiki rather than a forum. We planned the Handbook to be an open and
growable resource – if you want to add to it, join us! The purpose of
all this work is to provide a means of lubricating the process of
creating online courses and/or learning spaces.

Please use this handbook to enhance your own peer learning and please
join our effort to expand and enhance its value. The people who came
together to create the first edition – few of us knew any of the others,
and often people from three continents would participate in our
synchronous meetings – found that creating the Handbook was a training
course and experiment in peeragogy. If you want to practice peeragogy,
here’s a vehicle. Not only can you use it, you can expand it, spread it
around. Translators have already created versions of the first edition
of the handbook in Spanish, and Italian, and work is in progress to
bring these up to date with the second edition. We’ve recently added a
Portuguese translation team: more translators are welcome.

What made this work? Polycentric leadership is one key. Many different
members of the project stepped up at different times and in different
ways and did truly vital things for the project. Currently, over 30
contributors have signed the CC Zero waiver and have material in the
handbook; over 600 joined our Peeragogy in Action community on G+; and
over 1000 tweets mention peeragogy.org. People clearly like the concept
of peeragogy – and a healthy number also like participating in the
process.

We know that this isn’t the last word. We hope it’s a start. We invite
new generations of editors, educators, learners, media-makers,
web-makers, and translators to build on our foundation.

<span>Howard Rheingold
Marin County
January, 2014
</span>

# Introduction

*Peeragogy* is a flexible framework of techniques for peer learning and
peer knowledge production. As pedagogy theoretically articulates the
transmission of knowledge from teachers to students, peeragogy describes
the way peers produce and utilize knowledge together. With OER, wikis,
the internet, Free Software and mobile networks, groups of people can
learn, connect and create knowledge together inside and outside of
formal institutions in ways never before possible. These tools can
facilitate connected learning, and collaborative engagement but they
only work well when combined with practices that work well for the
people involved.

The learning mind-set and new strategies for good faith collaboration
that we are uncovering in the Peeragogy project can be applied in
classrooms, hackerspaces, business meetings, wiki projects and
interconnected collaborations across an entire society.  In this book
we will examine the way the values that helped shape Wikipedia and
free software can be applied in other learning contexts.  We draw on
our experience as practitioners of “Mode 2” knowledge production
(i.e. in *loosely knit multidisciplinary teams working together for
short periods of time on specific real-world problems*) – both as
co-authors of this book and in a wide variety of other projects.  As
you read, you are invited to look for further applications of
peeragogy in your life and in the world around you. We begin with a
quick walkthrough of the Peeragogy concept, some warm-up exercises,
and a Peeragogy project directory that we think will be helpful as you
get started:



Landmarks from the life of peeragogy
====================================

Feedback from two novice course organizers


*Before the Peeragogy project as such was convened, two of us realised
that “peer produced peer learning” could benefit from further
theoretical and practical development. Here is a summary of our early
thoughts as volunteer course organizers at the Peer-2-Peer University
(P2PU):*

▶ Our best experiences as course organizers happened when we were
committed to working through the material ourselves. Combining this with
gently prompting peers to follow through on their commitments could go a
long way towards keeping engagement at a reasonable level – but this
only works when commitments are somewhat clear in the first place.

▶ It is typical for online communities to have strictly enforced
community norms. It would be helpful to have a concise discussion of
these available, together with up to date information on “best
practices” for organizers and participants. The current Course Design
Handbook provides one starting point, but it falls short of being a
complete guide to P2PU.

▶ In a traditional university, there are typically a lot of ways to
resolve problems without dropping out. P2PU’s new “Help Desk” could help
with this issue – if people use it.

▶ P2PU would have to work hard to use anything but “participation” as a
proxy value for “learning.” In terms of broader issues of quality
control, one serious thought is for P2PU core members (including staff)
to use the platform to organize their activities – entirely in the open.

▶ It is our firm belief that P2PU should work on a public roadmap that
leads from now up to the point where the vision is achieved. Both vision
and roadmap should be revised as appropriate.

The “FLOK Doc”
--

*In 2013, Ecuador launched the Free/Libre/Open Knowledge Society Project
to facilitate the transition to a ‘*buen saber*’, or ‘good knowledge’
society, which is an extension of the official strategy towards a ‘*buen
vivir*’-based society. The Peeragogy project contributed a brief to help
develop this plan. Here are some highlights:*

Ecuador has a law about free software and open knowledge (*Decreto
1014*, launched 2008). Article 32 of the *Ley orgánica de Educación
Superior* makes open source software mandatory for higher education.
Public universities are building their own OER repositories. What
peeragogy can offer are are working methods for co-producing relevant
Open Educational Resources on a wider scale. As such, peeragogy is
especially relevant to the goals and working methods of the *Human
Capabilities* stream of the FLOK project, but here are some ways it
could affect the other streams:

▶ *Commons-oriented Productive Capacities* will require people to learn
new ways of working. Can we start to build a peeragogical “extension
school”, by collaborating on a new handbook about sustainable
agricultural techniques?

▶ *Social Infrastructure and Institutional Innovation* will require
collaboration between many different agencies, local enterprises, and
global organizations. Can peeragogy help these groups cooperate
effectively? Coauthoring a handbook about inter-agency cooperation could
help.

▶ *Hardware and Connectivity* needs to be connected to documentation and
active, participatory, support that shows how to use and adapt new
technologies to our use cases.

▶ *Commons’ Infrastructure for Collective Life* could co-develop along
with a pattern language that shows how to interconnect elements of
knowledge and practical solutions that are (re)generative of the commons
and relevant to learners’ needs.

<img class="displayed" src="./images/flok1.jpg" alt="Peeragogy in relation to the FLOK Society Project" style="width: 600px;"/>

<img class="displayed" src="./images/flok2.jpg" alt="Peeragogy is especially relevant to the goals and working methods of the Human Capabilities Stream of the FLOK Society Project" style="width: 600px;"/>

New strategies for “good faith collaboration”


*We’re strongly in favor of the Wikimedia Foundation’s mission, “to
empower and engage people around the world to collect and develop
educational content under a free license or in the public domain, and
to disseminate it effectively and globally.” We hope peeragogy can
contribute to this and other free/open efforts to constructively
reshape the way education works in the future. Some values we
share with the Wikipedia project:*

▶ *Neutral POV*: Pretty much anyone can write an article for the
*Peeragogy Handbook* on anything related to peer learning and peer
production. We’ll help review and edit to make the work shine. Rather
than requiring each individual article to be neutral, we strive for
overall comprehensiveness.

▶ *Free content*: We’ve taken the radical step of putting material in
the handbook into the public domain, which means that anyone can reuse
material in the handbook for any purpose whatsoever, without asking
permission or even giving us attribution. The reason being: we want to
make re-use, application, and extension of this work as simple as
possible.

▶ *Respect and civility*: We strive to focus on learning. If someone
disagrees with a given choice, we remember that in true dialogue there
are no right or wrong answers and no one in charge. If someone seems to
be frustrated with the way the project is going, we ask why and attempt
to learn from them about what we could change – in order to learn more.

▶ *No firm rules*: The project roadmap is fluid, and our understanding
of the idea of “peeragogy” is revised and extended as we go. The living
patterns we catalog (in Part [practice-part]) aren’t prescriptive but
they do seem to reappear with variation across different learning
scenarios. We don’t have a fixed platform or leadership structure, but
use whatever tools and teams seem most suitable for the purpose at hand.

# Chapter summaries


### Motivation

You might wonder why we’re doing this project – what we hope to get out
of it as volunteers, and how we think what we’re doing can make a
positive difference in the world. Have a look at this chapter if you,
too, are thinking about getting involved in peeragogy, or wondering how
peeragogy can help you accelerate your learning projects.

#### *Case Study: 5PH1NX.*

This example focuses on the interrelationship of pedagogy and peeragogy
in a high school English class, when students are encouraged to find and
share creative ways to learn. Explore this case study for ideas and
encouragement for your own learning adventures.

### Peeragogy in Practice

Here we describe some of the interaction patterns that we’ve encountered
time and time again in the Peeragogy project. You can use the ideas in
this chapter as a starter-kit for your own experiments with peeragogy
right away. Sharing – and revising – patterns is one of the key
activities in peeragogy, so you will likely want to revisit this chapter
several times as you look through the rest of the book. Don’t forget
your red pen or pencil, because you’ll also want to tailor the patterns
we describe here to suit.

#### *Case Study: SWATS.*

We present another example of peer learning in a classroom setting,
focusing on the process of improving overall student performance with
the help of a group of student experts. After describing the case study
in general terms, we then re-analyze it using our pattern tools to show
how examples like this can be integrated into our project.

### Convening a Group

This chapter is about how to begin your own peeragogical project. You
can also use the ideas described here to strengthen an existing
collaboration. Simple but important questions will inspire unique
answers for you and your group. In short: who, what, when, where, why,
and how? Use this chapter to help design and critique your project’s
roadmap.

#### *Play & Learning.*

What makes learning fun? Just as actors learn their roles through the
dynamic process of performance, In other words, the more we engage with
a topic, the better we learn it and the more satisfying - or fun - the
process becomes.

#### *K-12 Peeragogy.*

The key to becoming a successful ‘connected educator-learner’ involves
spending the time needed to learn how to learn and share in an open,
connected environment. Once you make the decision to enter into a
dialogue with another user, you become a connected educator/learner and
tap into the power of networks to distribute the load of learning.
Depending on their age, you can even facilitate an awareness of peer
networks among your students.

#### *P2P Self-Organizing Learning Environments.*

This section engages invites an exploration of support for
self-organized learning in global and local networks. Emergent
structures can create startling ripple effects.

### Organizing a Learning Context

Peer learning is sometimes organized in “courses” and sometimes in
“spaces.” We present the results of an informal poll that reveals some
of the positive and some of the negative features of our own early
choices in this project.

#### *Adding Structure with Activities.*

The first rule of thumb for peer learning is: announce activities only
when you plan to take part as a fully engaged participant. Then ask a
series of questions: what is the goal, what makes it challenging, what
worked in other situations, what recipe is appropriate, what is
different about learning about this topic?

#### *Student Authored Syllabus.*

This chapter describes various methods for co-creating a curriculum. If
you’re tasked with teaching an existing curriculum, you may want to
start with a smaller co-created activity; but watch out, you may find
that co-creation is habit forming.[^1]

#### *Case Study: Collaborative Explorations.*

This chapter describes collaborative peer learning among adult students
in the Master’s program in Critical and Creative Thinking at University
of Massachusetts in Boston. The idea in the collaborative explorations
is to encourage individuals pursuing their own interests related to a
predetermined topic, while supporting learning of everyone in the group
through sharing and reflection. These interactions of supportive mutual
inquiry evolve the content and structure within a short time frame and
with open-ended results.

### Cooperation

Sometimes omitting the figurehead empowers a group. Co-facilitation
tends to work in groups of people who gather to share common problems
and experiences. The chapter suggests several ways to co-facilitate
discussions, wiki workflows, and live online sessions. Conducting an
“after action review” can help expose blind spots.

#### *The Workscape.*

In a corporate workscape, people are free-range learners: protect the
learning environment, provide nutrients for growth, and let nature take
its course. A workscape features profiles, an activity stream, wikis,
virtual meetings, blogs, bookmarks, mobile access and a social network.

#### *Participation.*

Participation grows from having a community of people who learn
together, using a curriculum as a starting point to organize and trigger
engagement. Keep in mind that participation may follow the 90/9/1
principle (lurkers/editors/authors) and that people may transition
through these roles over time.

#### *Designs For Co-Working.*

Designing a co-working platform to include significant peer learning
aspects often requires a new approach. This chapter describes the
initial steps of converting an existing online encyclopedia project into
a peer learning platform.

### Assessment

“Usefulness” is an appropriate metric for assessment in peeragogy, where
we’re concerned with devising our own problems rathan than the problems
that have been handed down by society. We use the idea of return on
investment (the value of changes in behavior divided by the cost of
inducing the change) to assess the Peeragogy project itself, as one
example.

#### *Researching peeragogy.*

This chapter is based on a “found manuscript” created by one of us as an
undergraduate. It looks at the challenges that are associated with
combining the roles of student, teacher, and researcher. It shows the
relevance of peer support, and also illustrates the important factor of
time in the evolution of an idea.

### Technologies, Services, and Platforms

Issues of utility, choice, coaching, impact and roles attach to the wide
variety of tools and technologies available for peer learning. Keys to
selection include the features you need, what people are already using,
and the type of tool (low threshold, wide wall, high ceilings) used for
collaboration.

#### *Forums.*

Forums are web-based communication media that enable groups of people to
conduct organized multimedia discussions about multiple topics over a
period of time, asynchronously. A rubric for evaluating forum posts
highlights the value of drawing connections. The chapter includes tips
on selecting forum software.

#### *Wiki.*

A wiki is a website whose users can add, modify, or delete its content
via a web browser. Pages have a feature called “history” which allows
users to see previous versions and roll back to them. The chapter
includes tips on how to use a wiki and select a wiki engine, with
particular attention to peer learning opportunities.

#### *Real-time meetings.*

Web services enable broadband-connected learners to communicate in real
time via audio, video, slides, whiteboards, chat, and screen-sharing.
Possible roles for participants in real-time meetings include searchers,
contextualizers, summarizers, lexicographers, mappers, and curators.
This mode of interaction supports emergent agendas.

#### *Connectivism in Practice.*

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are decentralized online learning
experiences: individuals and groups create blogs or wikis and comment on
each other’s work, often with other tools helping find information.

### Resources

Here we present a sample syllabus for bringing peer learning to life,
recommended reading and tips on writing for The Handbook, as well as our
Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication.

[^1]: Quick tip: if you create a syllabus, share it!

# Motivation



> Participants must bring self-knowledge and no small measure of honesty
> to the peer-learning project in order to accurately enunciate their
> motivations. If everyone in your peer learning project asks “What
> brings me here?” “How can I contribute?” and “How can I contribute
> more effectively?” things will really start percolating. Test this
> suggestion by asking these questions yourself and taking action on the
> answers!

Some of the primary motivators reported by participants in the Peeragogy
project include:

1.  Acquisition of training or support in a topic or field;

2.  Building relationships with interesting people;

3.  Finding professional opportunities by networking;

4.  Creating or bolstering personal connections;

5.  More organized and rational thinking through dialog and debate
    <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>;

6.  Feedback about their own performance and understanding of the topic.

We’ve seen that different motivations can affect the vitality of the
peeragogical process and the end result for the individual participant. 
And different participants definitely have different motivations, and
the differences can be surprising: for instance, if you’re motivated by
social image, you may not be so interested in reciprocity, and vice
versa <span>[</span>2<span>]</span>. Motivations come with associated
risks. For example, one may be reluctant to mention business aspirations
in a volunteer context for fear of seeming greedy or commercial. Whether
or not potential peeragogues eventually decide to take on the risk
depends on various factors.  Actions that typify inappropriate behavior
in one culture might represent desirable behavior in another.
Motivations often come out of the closet through conflict; for example,
when one learner feels offended or embarrassed by the actions of
another.

When it comes to primary motivators, it seems some people are more
motivated by the *process* and some people are motivated by the *end
result*. A lot of the motivations mentioned in the list above are
process-oriented. A process orientation is exemplified in the following
quote:

> **Philip Spalding**: “The idea of visiting a garden together in a
> group to learn the names of flowers might have been the original
> intention for forming a Garden Group. The social aspect of having a
> day out might be goal of the people participating.”

The basic dichotomy between process and product can be a source of
tension. Some people are OK with a process that is long and drawn out –
because they’re mostly there for the process itself anyway. Others will
only tolerate with a slight delay as long as the important end result
remains in sight. Without a clear understanding and a good balance
between these different core motivators, there will be conflict.

People often come to a collaboration with their own motivation in mind
(with more or less clarity from case to case). They don’t always step
back to realise that other people are coming from the point of view of
another often very different motivation. It never hurts to ask,
especially when conflict rears up. Accordingly, especially for those
readers who are interested in the *end results* and *applications* of
peeragogy, and not yet steeped in the process, here’s what we ask:

*What are the problems you’re grappling with? How do you think “peer
learning” and “peer production” could help you? Would you be willing to
share some of the techniques that you use, and to learn together with
us?*

Example: Peeragogy editor Charlotte Pierce
==========================================

Basically, I’m here because as an early adopter and admitted gadget
freak, I find it fun and rewarding to explore new technologies and
topics that I feel have a practical or exciting application. But I have
some some other motivations that subtly co-exist alongside my eagerness
to explore and learn.

Howard Rheingold’s reputation as an innovator and internet pioneer got
my attention when he announced his Think-Know Tools course on Facebook
in 2012. I had known of Howard from the 1990’s when I was a member of
The WELL (Whole Earth \`Lectronic Link). I was curious to see what
Howard was up to, so I signed onto the wiki site, paid my \$300, and
took the course starting in October.

Looking back, I realize we were practicing Peeragogy throughout the TKT
course, though at the time I hardly knew peer learning from a pickle. In
late November, missing the camaraderie and challenge of TKT, I stepped
over to check out the *Peeragogy Handbook*.

Which brings me to motivations in signing on to Peeragogy. Since Howard
and several Think-Know Tools co-learners were already dedicating their
time here and their work looked innovative and exciting, I suspected
they might be onto something that I wanted to be a part of. Plus, my
brain was primed by the TKT experience. “What if a diverse group of
people could learn a subject with little or no cost and not a lot of
barriers to entry,” I thought. “What if their own experience qualified
them to join, contribute, and learn.”

I also thought there might be a chance to meet some potential business
partners or clients there - but if not, the experience looked rewarding
and fun enough for me to take the risk of no direct remuneration. There
was no up front cost to me, and a wealth of knowledge to gain as a part
of something new and exciting. These are always big draws for me. I
wanted to be in on it, and nobody was telling me I couldn’t!

My projections proved correct. The participants already on board were
gracious in welcoming me to Peeragogy, patient in getting me up to
speed, and persistent in coaxing me into using the tools central to the
project. I connected, learned, grew, and contributed. Now I’m on the
brink of starting a peer learning project of my own in my publishing
organization, IPNE.org. Stay tuned!

Example: Cafes, schools, workshops
==================================

Suppose we wanted to make Peeragogy into a model that can be used in
schools, libraries, and so forth, worldwide - and, in fact we do!  How
can we bring the basic Peeragogy motivations to bear, and make a
resource, plan of action, and process that other people can connect
with?  In brief, how do we build peer learning into the curriculum,
providing new insight from the safety of the existing structure?

One concrete way to implement these broad aims would be to make a
peeragogy-oriented *development* project whose goal is to set up a
system of internet cafes, schools, or workshops in places like China or
Africa, where people could go to collaborate on work or to learn
technical subjects. Students could learn on the job. It seems reasonable
to think that investors could make a reasonable profit through
“franchises,” hardware sales, and so forth – and obviously making money
is a motivation that most people can relate to.

In developing such a project, we would want to learn from other similar
projects that already exist.  For example, in Chicago, State Farm
Insurance has created a space called the “[Next Door
Cafe](https://www.nextdoorchi.com/)” that runs community events. One of
their offerings is free financial coaching, with the explicit agreement
that the issues you discuss return to State Farm as market research.

> **State Farm Insurance**: “Free? Really. Yes, because we’re
> experimenting. We want to learn what people really want. Then, we’ll
> shoot those wants back to the Farm. We help you. You help us innovate.
> We’re all smarter for it. We think it’s a win-win.”

Thus, Next Door Cafe forms part of a system to exploit the side-effects
of interpersonal interactions to create a system that learns.  A peer
learning example from the opposite side of the world started in a slum
next to New Delhi where Sugata Mitra gave children a computer and they
self organized into a learning community and taught themselves how to
use the machine and much more.

> **Sugata Mitra**: “I think what we need to look at is we need to look
> at learning as the product of educational self-organization. If you
> allow the educational process to self-organize, then learning emerges.
> It’s not about making learning happen. It’s about letting it happen.”

In 2014, we tried a similar experiment. We asked: Can we build a
“[Peeragogy
Accelerator](http://commonsabundance.net/docs/help-build-the-peeragogy-accelerator-work-in-progress/)”
for a half-dozen peer learning projects, each of which defines their own
metrics for success, but who come together to offer support and
guidance, using the *Peeragogy Handbook* as a resource? We tried that
with several our own projects, and benefitted from the peer support.
Several months later, we found the Accelerator format even more exciting
when we ran a one-off series focusing on Sagarika Bhatta’s research on
adaptation to climate change in Nepal. Our sense is that peeragogy could
be useful for building a global support network around just about any
project. Peeragogy can support a culture of real engagement, rather than
“clicktivism,” and the direct exchange of critically-assessed effort
rather than often-inefficient donations of cash [3].

### References

1.  Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber (2011). Why do humans reason? Arguments
    for an argumentative theory, *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 34,
    57-111.

2.  Jérôme Hergueux (2013). [Cooperation in a Peer Production Economy:
    Experimental Evidence from
    Wikipedia](https://cyber.law.harvard.edu/interactive/events/luncheons/2013/11/jerome),
    talk presented at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society.

3.  Kevin Edmonds (2012). Beyond Good Intentions: The Structural
    Limitations of NGOs in Haiti. *Critical Sociology*, 39(3).


# 5PH1NX


> 5PH1NX: 5tudent Peer Heuristic for 1Nformation Xchange - we think of
> it as a “curiously trans-media” use case in peeragogical assessment.

Over the last several decades technology has driven massive shifts in
the way we communicate and collaborate. Information technology,
socioeconomic trends, an increasingly complex and uncertain future, and
school’s failed brand are contributing factors in an emerging discourse
that seeks to align learning with our rapidly changing culture.

Open Source Learning and Peeragogy, two emerging theoretical frameworks
in this discourse, leverage end-to-end user principles of communication
technology to facilitate peers learning together and teaching each
other. In both traditional and liminal learning communities, one of the
major points of contact between education and societal culture is the
purposeful use of assessment. The processes of giving, receiving, and
applying constructive critique makes learners better thinkers,
innovators, motivators, collaborators, coworkers, friends, relatives,
spouses, teammates, and neighbors. Implementing peer-based assessment
can be problematic in schooling institutions where evaluative authority
is traditionally conflated with hierarchical authority, and where
economic and political influences have focused attention on summative,
quantitative, standardized measurement of learning and intelligence.

This is the story of how one learning community is adopting Open Source
Learning and Peeragogical principles to decentralize and enrich the
assessment process.

> **Aldous Huxley**: “Knowledge is acquired when we succeed in fitting a
> new experience into the system of concepts based upon our old
> experiences. Understanding comes when we liberate ourselves from the
> old and so make possible a direct, unmediated contact with the new,
> the mystery, moment by moment, of our existence.”

Enter 5PH1NX


On Monday, April 2, 2011, students in three English classes at a
California public high school discovered anomalies in the day’s entry on
their course blog. (Reminder: not so long ago this sentence would have
been rightly interpreted as being science fiction.) The date was wrong
and the journal topic was this:

> In The Principles of Psychology (1890), William James wrote, “The
> faculty of voluntarily bringing back a wandering attention, over and
> over again, is the very root of judgment, character and will. No one
> is *compos sui* if he have it not. An education which should improve
> this faculty would be the education par excellence.” How have your
> experiences in this course helped you focus your attention? What do
> you still need to work on? What elements of the following text (from
> Haruki Murakami’s *1Q84*) draw your attention and help you construct
> meaning?\
> The driver nodded and took the money. “Would you like a receipt?” “No
> need. And keep the change.” “Thanks very much,” he said. “Be
> care**f**ul, it looks windy out there. Don’t sl**i**p.” “I’ll be
> careful,” Aomame said. “A**n**d also,” the **d**river said,
> facing **t**he mirror, “please remember: t**h**ings are not what they
> seem.”  Things are not what they seem, Aomame repeated mentally. “What
> do you mean by that?” she asked with knitt**e**d brows. The driver
> chose his words carefully: “It’s **j**ust that y**o**u’re about to do
> something out of the ordinary. Am I right? People do not ordinarily
> climb down the emergency stairs of the Metropolitan Expressway in the
> middle of the day– especially women.” “I suppose you’re right.”
> “Right. And after you do something like that, the everyday loo**k** of
> things might seem to chang**e** a little. Things may
> look *diffe**r**ent* to you than they did before. I’ve had that
> experience myself. But don’t let appearance**s** fool you. There’s
> always only one reality.”

Find the jokers


<img class="displayed" src="./images/jokers.jpg" alt="Jokers" style="width: 600px;"/>

The jokers were real and hidden (without much intent to conceal) around
the classroom and in students’ journals. Students found them and asked
questions about the letters in bold; the questions went unanswered. Some
thought it was just another of their teacher’s wild hair ideas. Although
they didn’t know it yet they were playing the liminal role that Oedipus
originated in mythology. Solving the riddle would enable them to usher
out an old way of thinking and introduce the new.

The old way: An authority figure sets the rules, packages the
information for a passive audience, and unilaterally evaluates each
learner’s performance. In that context, peeragogical assessment might be
introduced with a theoretical framework, a rubric, and a lesson plan
with input, checks for understanding, and guided practice as a
foundation for independent work.

The new way: In Open Source Learning the learner pursues a path of
inquiry within communities that function as end-to-end user networks.
Each individual begins her learning with a question and pursues answers
through an interdisciplinary course of study that emphasizes multiple
modalities and the five Fs: mental Fitness, physical Fitness, spiritual
Fitness, civic Fitness, and technological Fitness. Learners collaborate
with mentors and receive feedback from experts, community-based peers,
and the public. They are the heroes of learning journeys. Heroes don’t
respond to syllabi. They respond to calls to adventure. Open Source
Learning prepares students for the unforeseen.

By the time they met the 5PH1NX students had learned about habits of
mind, operating schema, digital culture and community, self-expression,
collaboration, free play, autonomy, confidence/trust/risk, and
resilience. These ideas had been reinforced through nonfiction articles
and literary selections such as Montaigne’s Essays, Plato’s Allegory of
the Cave, Shakespeare’s Hamlet, Sartre’s No Exit and others. The first
poem assigned in the course was Bukowski’s “[Laughing
Heart](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bHOHi5ueo0A)”. *The Gods will
offer you chances. Know them. Take them.*

So it is with knowledge and understanding. Today we are presented with
an overwhelming, unprecedented quantity and variety of data in our
physical and virtual lives; to cope we must improve the ways we seek,
select, curate, analyze, evaluate, and act on information.

On the back of each Joker card was a QR code that linked to a blog page
with riddles and clues to a search. At this point students realized they
were playing a game. A tab on the blog page labeled “The Law” laid out
the rules of engagement:

This is The Law


1.  You cannot “obey” or “break” The Law. You can only make good
    decisions or bad decisions.

2.  Good decisions lead to positive outcomes.

3.  Bad decisions lead to suffering.

4.  Success requires humanity.

5.  “For the strength of the Pack is the Wolf, and the strength of the
    Wolf is the Pack.” -Rudyard Kipling

6.  “The Way of the sage is to act but not to compete.” -Lao Tzu

7.  Be honorable.

8.  Have fun.

9.  Question.

10. *Sapere aude*.

This is The Law. After a second set of on-campus and blog quests,
students noticed a shift in 5PH1NX. A couple of weeks before the first
clue was published, during a Socratic seminar on Derrida’s concept of
Free Play, a student said, “We learn best when adults take away the
crutches and there is no safety net.”? The quote was used in the next
clue; students began to realize that the game was not pre-determined.
5PH1NX was evolving in response to their contributions. This is a
manifestation of the hackneyed writing cliché: show, don’t tell. The
student’s comment was a call to action. The Feats of Wisdom were
designed to engage learners over a vacation break in fun, collaborative,
social media-friendly missions that required engagement in the
community, expansion of their personal learning networks, and
documentation on their blogs. For example:

#### FEAT \#1.

*Buy a ticket to “The Hunger Games” (or any other movie that’s likely to
draw a large, young, rowdy audience). Before the lights dim and the
trailers begin, walk to the screen, turn to the audience, and in a loud,
clear voice, recite the “To be, or not to be…” soliloquy from Hamlet
(don’t worry if you make a couple mistakes, just be sure you make it all
the way to, “Be all my sins remembered.”). [Capture the event on video &
post it to your
blog.](http://alarhsenglitcomp.blogspot.com/2012/12/feats-of-wisdom-1_15.html)*

Students had been using the Internet without an Acceptable Use Policy
all year; such policies are one-to-many artifacts of a central authority
and far weaker than community norms. So rather than introduce “rules”
5PH1NX simply provided a reminder of the client-side responsibility.

The Emergence of Peeragogical Assessment
-

The third page on the Feats of Wisdom blog was entitled *Identifying and
Rewarding Greatness*, where learners were greeted with the following
paragraph:

> If you see something that was done with love, that pushed the
> boundaries, set the standard, broke the mold, pushed the envelope,
> raised the bar, blew the doors off, or rocked in some previously
> unspecified way, please bring it to the attention of the tribe by
> posting a link to it <span>[</span>here<span>]</span>.

No one did. Instead, they started doing something more effective. They
started building. One student hacked the entire game and then created
her own version. Other students began to consider the implications for
identifying and rewarding greatness. They realized that one teacher
couldn’t possibly observe how 96 students were working over vacation out
in the community and online to accomplish the Feats of Wisdom. In order
to get credit for their efforts they would have to curate and share
their work-process and product. They also realized that the same logic
applied to learning and coursework in general; after all, even the most
engaged, conscientious teacher only sees a high school or college
student a few hours a week, under relatively artificial conditions. The
learner presumably spends her whole life in the company of her own
brain. Who is the more qualified reporting authority? With these
thoughts in mind students created *Project Infinity*, a peer-to-peer
assessment platform through which students could independently assign
value to the thoughts and activities they deemed worthy. Because the
2011-12 5PH1NX was a three-week exercise in gamification, *Project
Infinity* quickly evolved to include collaborative working groups and
coursework. This was learner-centered Peeragogical assessment in action;
learners identified a need and an opportunity, they built a tool for the
purpose, they managed it themselves, and they leveraged it in a
meaningful way to support student achievement in the core curriculum.

Project Infinity 2 & Implications for the Future


Alumni from the Class of 2012 felt such a strong positive connection to
their experience in Open Source Learning and Peeragogical assessment
that they built a version for the Class of 2013. They created *Project
Infinity 2* with enhanced functionality. They asked the teacher to embed
an associated Twitter feed on the course blog, then came to classes to
speak with current students about their experiences. Everyone thought
the Class of 2013 would stand on the shoulders of giants and adopt the
platform with similar enthusiasm. They were wrong. Students understood
the concept and politely contributed suggestions for credit, but it
quickly became evident that they weren’t enthusiastic. Submissions
decreased and finally the *Project Infinity 2* Twitter feed disappeared
from the course blog. Learners’ blogs and project work suggested that
they were mastering the core curriculum and meta concepts, and they
appeared generally excited about Open Source Learning overall. So why
weren’t they more excited about the idea of assessing themselves and
each other? Because *Project Infinity 2* wasn’t theirs. They didn’t get
to build it. It was handed to them in the same way that a syllabus is
handed to them. No matter how innovative or effective it might be,
*Project Infinity 2* was just another tool designed by someone else to
get students to do something they weren’t sure they wanted or needed to
do in the first place. Timing may also be a factor. Last year’s students
didn’t meet 5PH1NX until the first week in April, well into the spring
semester. This year’s cohort started everything faster and met 5PH1NX in
November.  In January they understood the true potential of their
situation started to take the reins. As students realized what was
happening with the clues and QR codes they approached the teacher and
last year’s alumni with a request: “Let Us In.” They don’t just want to
design learning materials or creatively demonstrate mastery, they want
to chart their own course and build the vehicles for taking the trip.
Alumni and students are becoming Virtual TAs who will start the formal
peer-to-peer advising and grading process. In the Spring Semester all
students will be asked to prepare a statement of goals and intentions,
and they will be informed that the traditional teacher will be
responsible for no more than 30% of their grade. The rest will come from
a community of peers, experts and members of the public. On Tuesday of
Finals Week, 5PH1NX went from five players to two hundred. Sophomores
and freshman have jumped into the fray and hacked/solved one of the blog
clues before seniors did. Members of the Open Source Learning cohort
have also identified opportunities to enrich and expand 5PH1NX. A series
of conversations about in-person retreats and the alumni community led
to students wanting to create a massively multiple player learning
cohort. Imagine 50,000-100,000 learners collaborating and sharing
information on a quest to pass an exam by solving a puzzle that leads
them to a “Learning Man Festival”? over Summer break. When 5PH1NX
players return from Winter Break in January they will transform their
roles relative to the game and the course. Several have already shared
“AHA!” moments in which they discovered ways to share ideas and
encourage collaboration and peer assessment. They have identified
Virtual Teaching Assistant candidates, who will be coached by alumni,
and they have plans to provide peer-based assessment for their online
work. They are also now actively engaged in taking more control over the
collaboration process itself. On the last day of the semester, a
post-finals throwaway day of 30-minute class sessions that
administrators put on the calendar to collect Average Daily Attendance
money, hardly anyone came to campus. But Open Source Learning students
were all there. They have separated the experience of learning from the
temporal, spatial, and cultural constraints of school. They understand
how democracy works: those who participate make the decisions. No one
knows how this ends, but the outcome of Peeragogical assessment is not a
score; it is learners who demonstrate their thinking progress and
mastery through social production and peer-based critique. This
community’s approach to learning and assessment has prepared its members
for a complex and uncertain future by moving them from a world of
probability to a world of possibility. As one student put it in a video
entitled “We Are Superman,” “What we are doing now may seem small, but
we are part of something so much bigger than we think. What does this
prove? It proves everything; it proves that it’s possible.”

Background
-

A world in which work looks like what’s described in the PSFK think
tank’s *[Future of Work Report
2013](http://www.slideshare.net/PSFK/psfk-presents-future-of-work-report)*
requires a new learning environment.

The problem is that tools and strategies such as MOOCs, videos, virtual
environments, and games are only as good as the contexts in which they
are used. Even the most adept practitioners quickly discover that
pressing emerging technology and culture into the shape of yesterday’s
curricular and instructional models amounts to little more than
Skinner’s Box 2.0. So what is to be done? How can we use emerging tools
and culture to deliver such an amazing individual and collaborative
experience that it shatters expectations and helps students forget
they’re in school long enough to fall in love with learning again?

Education in the Information Age should enable learners to find,
analyze, evaluate, curate, and act on the best available information.
Pursuing an interdisciplinary path of inquiry in an interest-based
community doesn’t just facilitate the acquisition of factual knowledge
(which has a limited half-life). The process brings learners closer to
understanding their own habits of mind and gives them practice and an
identity in the culture they’ll be expected to join after they graduate.
This requires new literacies and a curriculum that emphasizes mental
fitness, physical fitness, spiritual fitness, civic fitness, and
technological fitness.

Models of assessment that emphasize self-directed and collaborative
Peeragogical principles enrich the learning experience and accelerate
and amplify deep understanding. Because these approaches are pull-based
and generate tens of thousands of multi- or trans-media data points per
learner, they also generate multi-dimensional portraits of learner
development and provide feedback that goes far beyond strengths and
weaknesses in content retention. The long-term benefit is exponential.
Learners who can intentionally direct their own concentration are
empowered far beyond knowledge acquisition or skill mastery. They become
more effective thinkers and – because they are invested – more caring
people. This learning experience is of their own making: it isn’t
business, it’s personal. The inspiration to recreate the process for
themselves and for others is the wellspring of the lifelong learner.

As Benjamin Disraeli put it, “In general the most successful man in life
is the man who has the best information.” It is a widely accepted truism
in business that better data leads to better decisions. We now have the
ability to generate, aggregate, analyze, and evaluate much richer data
sets that can help us learn more about helping each other learn. Sharing
richer data in different ways will have the same game changing effect in
learning that it has in professional sports and investment banking.

Self-directed, collaborative assessment generates an unprecedented
quantity and variety of data that illuminates aspects of learning,
instruction, and overall systemic efficacy. Even a quick look at readily
available freeware metrics, blog/social media content, and time stamps
can provide valuable insight into an individual’s working process and
differentiate learners in a network.

In the larger scheme of things, Peeragogical assessment provides direct
access to and practice in the culture learners will be expected to join
when they complete their course of study. Collaboration, delegation,
facilitating conversations, and other highly valued skills are developed
in plain view, where progress can be critiqued and validated by peers,
experts and the public.

But tall trees don’t grow by themselves in the desert. Peeragogical
innovation can be challenging in organizational cultures that prioritize
control and standardization; as Senge *et al*. have observed, the system
doesn’t evaluate quality when dealing with the unfamiliar, it just
pushes back. In schools this is so typical that it doesn’t merit comment
in traditional media. The world notices when Syria goes dark, but in
school, restricted online access is business as usual.

Cultural constraints can make early adopters in technology-based
Peeragogy seem like Promethean risk-takers.  Whenever the author gives a
talk or an interview, someone asks if he’s in trouble.

Learners are not fooled by the rhetoric of in loco parentis or vision
statements that emphasize “safe, nurturing learning environments.” With
notable exceptions, today’s school leaders do not know as much about
technology as the young people for whom they assume responsibility.
Still, learners understand survival: they are fighting in unfavorable
terrain against an enemy of great power. Innovating is impossible, and
even loudly criticizing school or advocating for change is a risk. As a
result many do just enough to satisfy requirements without getting
involved enough to attract attention. Some have also internalized the
critical voices of authority or the failure of the formal experience as
evidence of their own inability: “I’m just not good at math.”

How do we know when we’re really good at something? Standardized testing
feedback doesn’t help learners improve. Most of us don’t have a natural
talent for offering or accepting criticism. And yet, as Wole Soyinka put
it, “The greatest threat to freedom is the absence of criticism.”
Peeragogical interaction requires refining relational and topical
critique, as well as skills in other “meta” literacies, including but
not limited to critical thinking, collaboration, conflict resolution,
decision-making, mindfulness, patience and compassion.

Interpersonal learning skills are undervalued in today’s schooling
paradigm. Consequently there is an operational lack of incentive for
teachers and learners to devote time and energy, particularly when it
carries a perceived cost in achievement on tests that determine
financial allocations and job security.  In recent years there has been
increasing pressure to tie teacher compensation, performance evaluation,
and job status directly to student performance on standardized tests.

Some educators are introducing peer-to-peer network language and even
introducing peer-based assessment. But the contracts, syllabi and
letters to students typically stink of *the old way*. These one-to-many
documents are presented by agents of the institution endowed with the
power to reward or punish. To many students this does not represent a
choice or a real opportunity to hack the learning experience. They
suspect manipulation, and they wait for the other shoe to drop. Learners
also don’t like to be told they’re free while being forced to operate
within tight constraints. Consider this likely reaction to a policy that
is highly regarded in the field:

> “Students may choose to reblog their work in a public place or on
> their own blogs, but do so at their own risk.”
>
> *(What? Did I read that correctly?)*
>
> “Students may choose to reblog their work in a public place or on
> their own blogs, but do so at their own risk.”
>
> *(Risk? What risk? The risk of possibly helping someone understand
> something that they didn’t before, or get a different opinion than the
> one they had before? Someone please help me make sense of this.)*

To effectively adopt Peeragogical assessment in the schooling context,
the community must construct a new understanding of how the members in a
network relate to one another independent of their roles in the
surrounding social or hierarchical systems. This requires trust, which
in school requires significant suspension of disbelief, which – and this
is the hard part – requires actual substantive, structural change in the
learning transaction. This is the defining characteristic of Open Source
Learning: as the network grows, changes composition, and changes
purpose, it also changes the direction and content of the learning
experience. Every network member can introduce new ideas, ask questions,
and contribute resources than refine and redirect the process.

This isn’t easy. A member in this network must forget what she knows
about school in order to test the boundaries of learning that shape her
relationship to content, peers, and expert sources of information and
feedback. This is how the cogs in the machine become the liminal heroes
who redesign it. Having rejected the old way, they must now create the
rituals that will come to define the new. They are following in the path
of Oedipus, who took on the inscrutable and intimidating Sphinx, solved
the riddle that had killed others who tried, and ushered out the old
belief systems to pave the way for the Gods of Olympus.  Imagine what
would have happened if Oedipus had had the Internet.

[sphinx-end]

# Patterns of Peeragogy



Introduction {#sec:Introduction}
============

Readers will have encountered peer production, at least in applications
like Wikipedia, StackExchange, and free/libre/open source software
development. In this paper we apply design patterns to understand the
human side of this kind of socio-technical development. In the Peeragogy
project, we aim to build upon these inspiring examples to help design
the future of education.

We have found design patterns tremendously useful for organizing our
thinking about these matters. However, there is a key difference between
our pattern catalog and previous collections of design patterns that
touch on similar domains – like *Liberating Voices: A Pattern Language
for Communication Revolution* [1] and *Pedagogical
Patterns: Advice for Educators* [2]. Our pattern
catalog is our primary project management tool, and as such, it evolves
in close symbiosis with the Peeragogy project. There are clear
precedents for this way of working within the design pattern tradition,
reaching back into its prehistory [3]. A quite
convincing implementation of Christopher Alexander’s idea of patterns as
a “living language” [4] [p. xvii] was realized with
one of the earliest applications of wiki software developed by Ward
Cunningham: the Portland Pattern Repository. What we’ve developed is a
further iteration of this idea. To use a visual metaphor, whereas other
pattern languages are mostly top-down, ours is bottom-up. That is,
structure is explicitly emergent. As we will detail below, these
features are built into our pattern template and the way we use the
pattern catalog. This style of project management is suitable for a
project that itself has emergent structure. The result is a hands-on
counterpart to existing sociological and historical research on peer
production, surveyed in [5].

Many of the patterns described in this paper were first shared in a
private Drupal forum, and were first made public on a Wordpress blog as
part of our *Peeragogy Handbook*.  They were then
discussed via gMail, Google+, and Google Hangouts, “hive edited” in real
time on Google Docs, format-shifted with pandoc, typeset with XeLaTeX,
hive edited again with ShareLaTeX, and then moved into Github and
bridged to Authorea for final edits. Along the way, some of the patterns
made an appearance at a PhD thesis defense [6], and the
pattern template was revised and revised again. Schematically, this is
what the current template tells us:

We believe that our pattern catalog will be useful for students and
educators who want their work to have real-world relevance, to activists
and policy-makers who want to develop practicable solutions to
large-scale problems, and to employees and managers who, like it or not,
find themselves working in distributed teams. Our approach to emergent
organization will also be of interest to theorists of social interaction
in fields like organization studies and, increasingly, computer science.
The next section introduces the in the form of a design pattern.
Sections [sec:Roadmap]–[sec:Scrapbook] list the main patterns in our
catalog. Figure [fig:connections] illustrates their interconnections.
Section [sec:Distributed~R~oadmap] summarizes the outlook.

<img class="displayed" src="./images/pattern_diagram.png" alt="Pattern diagram" style="width: 600px;"/>


References
-

1. Schuler , D. 2008. Liberating voices: A pattern language for communication revolution. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

2. Bergin , J., Eckstein , J., Volter , M., Sipos , M., Wallingford , E., Marquardt , K., Chandler , J., Sharp , H., and Manns , M. L. 2012.
Pedagogical patterns: Advice for educators. Joseph Bergin Software Tools, New York.

3. Alexander , C. 1964. Notes on the Synthesis of Form. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

4. Alexander , C., Ishikawa , S., and Silverstein , M. 1977. A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. Center for Environmental
Structure Series. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

5. Benkler , Y., Shaw , A., and Hill , B. M. 2015. Peer production: a modality of collective intelligence. In Handbook on the Economics of the Internet, J. M. Bauer and M. Latzer, Eds. Edward Elgar Publishing Limited. To appear.

6. Corneli , J. 2014. Peer produced peer learning: A mathematics case study. Ph.D. thesis, The Open University.




Peeragogy Project
=================

### Context

Architectual maverick Christopher Alexander asked the following
questions to an audience of computer programmers @alexander1999origins:

> “What is the Chartres of programming? What task is at a high enough
> level to inspire people writing programs, to reach for the stars?”

We believe that the nexus of learning and computers – exemplified today
by Wikipedia, StackExchange, and Free/Libre/Open Source Software (FLOSS)
– presents an implicit challenge to the old way of doing things in
education. Taking up that challenge and building a new model is reaching
*ad astra per aspera*.

### Problem

In a volunteer context, telling people what to do really doesn’t work.
So we need another way to communicate. Furthermore, everyone involved in
these projects seems to be learning all the time. So the way we
communicate needs to be adaptive to circumstances.

### Solution

Christopher Alexander introduced the idea of *design patterns* – using a
simple template to describe and shape the human life world. In our
context, design patterns allow us to bridge physical and virtual, move
from fantastic to concrete and back. We’ve made a few minor alterations
to Alexander’s original template in order to use patterns in a project
that is always changing. In addition to the traditional
*context*/*problem*/*solution* and *rationale*, we try to make it clear
what the very act of documenting each pattern *resolves*, and we record
the “*What’s next*” steps we have planned, in order to make the
currently acting forces explicit. As time goes by we revise. Like
Alexander, we cross-reference our patterns to understand the links
between them. The <span>**Peeragogy Project**</span> is itself an
up-to-date example of Alexander’s <span>**Network of Learning**</span>
@alexander1977pattern [p. 99].

### Rationale

Patterns are intuitive to write and read. Our specific interpretation of
the framework helps everyone involved integrate what they are learning.
We can use our design pattern catalog to scaffold our work on other
parts of the project – our technical platform, our Handbook, our
meetings – and to connect with others.

### Resolution

Writing down this pattern defines some of the key terms for
<span>**Newcomers**</span>, and shows how to use the pattern template
introduced schematically above. Together with Figure [fig:connections],
this pattern begins to show how we are affected by using patterns to
build emergent structure.

### What’s next

Feel free to join us and suggest new patterns and projects, or adapt our
patterns to help shape your own <span>**Peeragogy Project**</span>.[^1]

[^1]: In the present document, the term Peeragogy Project, written in a
    standard font, refers to a current historical, real-world, example
    of the <span>**Peeragogy Project**</span> pattern. This project has
    been active since it was convened by Howard Rheingold
    @howard-rheingold-lecture. In order to enhance the readability of
    our patterns for a general audience, *examples* drawn from our
    experiences in the Peeragogy Project and related projects appear in
    footnotes, rather than the pattern template as such.




Roadmap
=======

### Context

It is very useful to have an up-to-date public roadmap for the project
in a place where it can be discussed and maintained. The roadmap exists
as an artifact with which to share current, but never complete,
understanding of the space.

### Problem

Without a roadmap, there will not be a shared sense of the project’s
goals or working methods. It will be much harder for people to volunteer
to help out, or to assess the project’s progress. As everyone has time
limitations, the project has to offer enough of what the participant
seeks to keep it on their calendars. Because everyone comes at it with
different and changing interests, expertise and motivations, the process
has to be adaptive to circumstances.

### Solution

Keeping a list of current and upcoming activities, as well as goals and
working methods can help
<span>**[Newcomers](http://peeragogy.org/practice/heuristics/newcomer/)**</span>
and old-timers alike see where they can jump in. As we cross things off
the list, this gives a sense of the accomplishments to date, and any
major challenges that lie ahead. At the same time, this is a project
with emergent structure, and so the <span>**Roadmap**</span> needs to be
emergent, not simply prescriptive. (See Section
[sec:Distributed~R~oadmap] for our “distributed roadmap.”)

### Rationale

Unless the roadmap is easy for people to see and to update, they are not
likely to use it. If they manage to get involved, they will fly off in
their own direction; see <span>**Use or Make**</span>.[^1] But
frequently it’s impossible to know in advance what will happen! A
<span>**Roadmap**</span> that’s not quite right will feel burdening.
Sometimes it’s better to be more open to the unknown.

### Resolution

A project can survive without a regularly updated
<span>**Roadmap**</span>, but progress will be harder to come by and
deadlines will be more likely to be forgotten. Over the past years of
the project our various roadmaps have helped guide and organize our work
across continents, time zones and different day job work schedules. But
only now do we have a robust mechanism in place for building and
maintaining a “distributed roadmap.”

### What’s Next

Adding “What’s Next” steps to our patterns gives us a “distributed
roadmap.” And this works both ways: If we sense that something needs to
change about the project, that is a clue that we might need to record a
new pattern.

[^1]: In the Peeragogy project, once the handbook’s outline became
    fairly mature, we used it as a roadmap, by marking the sections that
    are “finished”, marking the sections where editing is currently
    taking place, and marking the stubs (possible starting points for
    future contributors). After this outline matured into a real [table
    of contents](http://peeragogy.org/table-of-contents/), we started to
    look in other directions for things to work on, and created a
    [roadmap for further development of the website and peeragogy
    project as a whole](http://peeragogy.org/peeragogy-org-roadmap/).
    Unlike the earlier outline, this one was relatively top down and did
    not have strong buy-in from contributors. Our thinking about
    roadmaps continued to evolve @corneli2013roadmaps, and in the
    Peeragogy Accelerator phase of the project
    @building-peeragogy-accelerator, we included a roadmap in the
    “behind the scenes” version of our landing page, we used it as a way
    to link to other documents we were working on. This shared
    “[bulletin
    board](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RZEsqFDwF-jPiCvgWzJgi6n6faTRTDuPQS1CMEeXxRE/edit#heading=h.p197njr3jsn8)”
    listing upcoming opportunities and completed tasks was much more
    active than the top-down roadmap on peeragogy.org.




Use or make
===========

### Context

Peer production, as the name indicates, is about producing, in other
words – “making.” But it also involves building on (“using”) the work of
others.

### Problem

People are often very attached to their own projects and don’t have a
sense of how their own initiatives can benefit from connecting with
others. Many projects die because the cost of <span>**[Reinventing the
Wheel](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ReinventingTheWheel)**</span> [c2] is too
high.

### Solution

Learning and creativity often involve recycling and remixing others’
ideas and techniques. Duchamp’s
<span>[readymades](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Readymades_of_Marcel_Duchamp&oldid=660437742)</span>
were a reaction against a narrow perspective on originality; DJs turn
songs that already exist into new modes of musical expression. Make it
possible for other people to remix and adapt your work too.[^1] Show
appreciation when they do. In the case of shared content, make backups
so that you don’t have to worry about losing the record of idea that
another person might not have noticed was important.

### Rationale

<span>**Creating a guide**</span> can help people avoid reinventing the
wheel.[^2] There are lots of tools and approaches out there – *use
them*, at least on a trial basis; return to the ones that work.[^3]

### Resolution

Noticing how difficult it is to remake things every time, and
encapsulating what we observed with the <span>**Use or Make**</span>
pattern reminds us to always consider re-purposing the work of others,
to think about how others can leapfrog ahead, building on our
experiences by incorporating our work.

### What’s Next

We’ve spun off the pattern catalog from the *Peeragogy Handbook* into
this paper, sharing it with a new community and gaining new
perspectives. Let’s look for other parts of the handbook we can spin
off!

[^1]: As a first key step, we’ve released the *Peeragogy Handbook* using
    the Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication (CC0). This legal
    instrument grants the greatest possible leeway to downstream users;
    see <https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>.
    Contributors need to agree to the following terms: “*I hereby waive
    all copyright and related or neighboring rights together with all
    associated claims and causes of action with respect to this work to
    the extent possible under the law.*” An email to one of the handbook
    editors or a comment to this effect on
    <http://peeragogy.org/resources/license/> suffices.

[^2]: Clearly we are not the first people to notice these things!
    Consider the following quote from the Wikimedia Foundation:
    “Unfortunately, many of our most valuable resources for learning and
    evaluation are scattered across wikis, buried in archived reports,
    incomplete, out of date, or are only available in a single language.
    As a result, we sometimes find ourselves re-inventing the wheel:
    missing opportunities, repeating common mistakes, and working harder
    than we need to because we are not aware of related projects done by
    others who came before us.” via
    <https://blog.wikimedia.org/2013/11/19/learning-patterns-new-way-share-important-lessons/>.

[^3]: As Willow Brugh of Geeks without Bounds and the MIT Media Lab
    remarked as a guest in one of our hangouts
    (<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NpyQfYVKfBI>): people often think
    that they need to build a community, and so fail to recognize that
    they are already part of a community.



Carrying capacity
=================

### Context

There’s only so much any one person can do in a project.

### Problem

At times, a facilitator or participant in the peer-learning enterprise
may feel he or she is over-contributing – or, perhaps more likely, that
others are under-contributing – or that someone else is railroading an
idea or dominating the discussion.

### Solution

If this happens, take a step back and observe the dynamics of
involvement. Ask questions and let others answer. Especially if you
start to feel the symptoms of burnout, seek a more sustainable level of
engagement. Lead by presenting a good example – and make sure it’s
someplace you, and others, actually want to go! This could be a good
time to revisit the group’s <span>**Roadmap**</span> and see if you can
figure out and clarify to others what concrete goal you’re working
towards. Remember that you can also change the “landscape” by making it
easier for other people to get involved – for example, by explaining
what you’re trying to do in a clear manner. Be on the look out for
opportunities to step back, watch, and listen. Try to be mindful of
phases when active or quiet involvement would be more helpful to the
individual and the group. It’s also helpful to let anyone who has taken
on a facilitation role know if you’re stepping back temporarily. Then,
when the time is right, step back in and get to work!

### Rationale

Even though your project may be very important, you won’t always make it
go better by working harder.

### Resolution

This pattern serves as a good reminder for anyone who believes him- or
herself to be caring more about project outcomes than other
participants. Investigate why this is. Are you all affected by the
outcomes in the same way? Working smart requires you to focus on your
own goals, while relating to others who may have a different outlook,
with different, but hopefully still compatible goals.

### What’s Next

This pattern catalog has been rewritten in a way that should make it
easy for anyone to add new patterns. Making it easy and fruitful for
others to get involved is one of the best ways to redistribute the load
(compare the
<span>**[Newcomer](http://peeragogy.org/practice/heuristics/newcomer/)**</span>
pattern).




A specific project
==================

### Context

You find yourself interested in or concerned about something, but you
only have a vague idea about how it works or how you fit in.

### Problem

It’s easy to think about issues that matter: there are many of them. The
problem is figuring out what you’re going to do about it. As a further
problem, getting concrete can be scary, because you risk failure.[^1]

### Solution

If you *are* able to get concrete about something to do, learn, and
achieve, you move from thinking about a topic to becoming a
practitioner. You may realize that your “specific project” is too large
to tackle directly. In this case, you will have to become even more
specific. Maintaining a project <span>**Roadmap**</span> can help keep
track of the smaller pieces and the bigger picture.

### Rationale

Being specific is important for bringing about to change.[^2] But while
actions speak louder than words, it’s important to act in a coherent way
if you want to be understood by others. However, in general it would be
a mistake to try to seek consensus before acting: it’s much better to
combine action with dialog.

### What’s Next

Each project connected with the Peeragogy Project should be described
with one or more patterns, each with specific, tangible “what’s next”
steps.[^3] The <span>**Pattern Audit Routine**</span> can help make
these “what’s next” steps concrete.

[^1]: In the Peeragogy project and more broadly, we’ve observed that
    some people are happy with a sense of experience or process, while
    others want to see results. Some others are in the middle. All of
    these variations are OK! However, we are often blinded by our own
    preferences, and in the worst case this can undermine or destroy
    group dynamics. At the very least it will add tension, as some want
    to continue to discuss and engage generally while others want to
    move forward. When the forward-movers try to act, those enjoying the
    experience may attempt to shut them down or may feel that they are
    being left out/behind.

[^2]: In the January, 2013, plenary session, [Independent Publishers of
    New England](http://ipne.org) (IPNE) President Tordis Isselhardt
    quietly listened to a presentation about how we created the
    *Peeragogy Handbook*. During the Q&A, she spoke up, wondering if
    peer-learning effort in IPNE might be more likely to succeed if the
    organization’s members “focused around a specific project.” As this
    lightbulb illuminated the room, those of us attending the plenary
    session suggested that IPNE could focus the project by creating an
    “Independent Publishing Handbook.” (Applause!) In the course of
    creating the IPNE Handbook, peer learners would assemble resource
    repositories, exchange expertise, and collaboratively edit
    documents. To provide motivation and incentive to participate in
    “PeerPubU”, members of the association will earn authorship credit
    for contributing articles, editor credit for working on the
    manuscript, and can spin off their own chapters as stand-alone,
    profit-making publications.

[^3]: We’ve found that writing papers for conferences is one activity
    that can help us focus and make improvements to our body of work
    that would not come about by simply meandering through revisions to
    the *Peeragogy Handbook*. Remixing these efforts into the handbook
    is a good source of improvements; see <span>**Use or Make**</span>.




Wrapper
=======

### Context

An active project with more than a few participants, and possibly with
<span>**Newcomers**</span> arriving frequently.

### Problem

In a very active project, it can be effectively impossible to stay up to
date with all of the details. Not everyone will be able to attend every
meeting (see
<span>**[Heartbeat](http://peeragogy.org/patterns/heartbeat/)**</span>)
or read every email, and project participants can easily get lost and
drift away. The experience can be even worse for
<span>**Newcomers**</span>: joining a project already going can feel
like trying to get aboard a rapidly moving vehicle. If you’ve taken time
off, you may feel like things have moved on so far that they cannot
catch up.

### Solution

A project contributor can summarizes what has happened recently in the
project, making progress comprehensible to participants who have not
been following all of the details.[^1] If they are kept up to date, a
project’s [landing
page](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy/) and
<span>**Roadmap**</span> also serve as a sort of “wrapper”, telling
people what resources they can expect to find in the project and how
they can participate.

### Rationale

The wrapper must check the public summaries of the project from time to
time to make sure that they accurately represent the facts on the
ground.[^2]

### Resolution

According to the theory proposed by Yochai Benkler, for free/open
“commons-based” projects to work, it is vital to have both (1) the
ability to contribute small pieces; (2) something that stitches those
pieces together @coases-penguin. The wrapper helps perform this
integrative stitching function, which is often much more challenging
than the job of breaking things down into pieces or just doing one of
the small pieces.

### What’s Next

We need better practices for automating the wrapping-up process. One of
the latest ideas is to develop a simple visual “dashboard” for the
project that would be a web page people could access and immediately get
an idea of what work is ongoing in the project with links for going more
in depth and/or contributing.

[^1]: In the Peeragogy project, this idea was initially suggested by
    Charlie Danoff, adapting an idea from his Indiana University class
    on EFL teaching led by Faridah Pawan. The idea was that someone take
    on the “wrapper role” – do a weekly pre/post wrap, so that new (and
    existing) users could get a feel for the status of the project at
    any given point in time.

[^2]: In the first year of the Peeragogy project, the “Weekly Roundup”
    by Christopher Tillman Neal served to engage and re-engage members.
    Peeragogues began to eager watched for the weekly reports to see if
    our teams or our names had been mentioned. When there was a holiday
    or break, Chris would announce the hiatus, to keep the flow going.
    In the second year of the project, we did not routinely publish
    summaries of progress, and instead, we assumed that interested
    parties will stay tuned on Google+. More recently, Charlie has begun
    publishing irregular wrap-up [blog
    posts](http://peeragogy.org/peeragogy-wrapper-post-9-feb-5-apr-2015/)
    and e-mails again, which helps keep people who don’t read Google+ up
    to date.




Heartbeat
=========

### Context

People have a shared interest, and have connected with each other about
it.

### Problem

What’s an easy way for those people to feel like there’s a *there,
there?*

### Solution

People seem to naturally gravitate to regularly scheduled activities.
Once a week (meetings) or once a year (conferences, festivals) are two
common variants. Sometimes people need a little extra prompt to join
in.[^1] When the project is bigger than more than just a few people,
it’s likely to have several <span>**Heartbeats**</span>.[^2]

### Rationale

This pattern might seem too obvious, since regularly scheduled meetings
are so ubiquitous. But there’s an important difference between a mere
meeting and a <span>**Heartbeat**</span>: in short, if the energy from
your meetings isn’t helping you or your group thrive, something needs to
change.

### Resolution

This pattern is one of the easiest ones to use to introduce
<span>**Newcomers**</span> to the idea of a design pattern, since
everyone is familiar with the pattern of a supportive routine. But it is
also a sophisticated tool: noticing when a new
<span>**Heartbeat**</span> is beginning to emerge is a way to be aware
of the priorities in the group, and may be a good source of new
patterns. Similarly, noticing when a specific <span>**Heartbeat**</span>
has faded may be a sign that one of our patterns should be moved to the
<span>**Scrapbook**</span>.

### What’s Next

Identifying and fostering new <span>**Heartbeats**</span> and new
working groups is a task that can help make the community more robust.
This is the temporal dimension of spin off projects described in
<span>**Use or Make**</span>.

[^1]: In the “Collaborative Lesson Planning” course led by Charlie
    Danoff at P2PU, Charlie wrote individual emails to people who were
    signed up for the course and who had disappeared, or lurked but
    didn’t participate. This helped course participants re-engage and
    make positive contributions. In more recent months, Charlotte Pierce
    has been the primary driver behind weekly meetings run using Google
    Hangout to coordinate work on the *Peeragogy Handbook* as well as
    tending to to other community interests. Not only have we gotten a
    lot of hands-on editorial work done this way, we’ve generated a
    tremendous amount of new material (both text and video footage) that
    is likely to find its way into future versions of the *Peeragogy
    Handbook*. As long as this continues, “Mondays at 1PM Eastern US
    time” is a reliable time to make contact with the Peeragogy Project.

[^2]: There have been several periods of time operated two regularly
    scheduled weekly meetings in the Peeragogy project at distinct time
    slots, for members with slightly different interests and slightly
    different availability. This typically relates to small
    special-purpose projects, like our work on this paper.



Creating a guide
================

### Context

Meaning-carrying tools, like handbooks or maps, can help collect content
and stories as well as assist others who want to adopt the idea.

### Problem

Established ideas have knowledge cartography challenges for newcomers,
consider trying to decipher a subway map in a foreign city. When the
idea or system is only “newly discovered”, the associated meanings may
not be well understood, and indeed they may not have been created. Even
if a topic is only “personally new”, it can be hard to find one’s way
around.

### Solution

The process of creating the guide can go hand-in-hand with figuring out
how the system works. Thus, techniques of [knowledge
cartography](http://knowledgecartography.org/) and [meaning
making](http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/r-97-47/two.html)
are useful for would-be guide creators.[^1]

### Rationale

It is important to keep in mind how “the map is not the territory,” and
map-making is only one facet of shared human activity. For instance, a
pattern description can be thought of as a “micro-map” of a specific
activity. These maps are not useful if they are divorced from practice.
The process of creating a guide creates a certain formality to the
project, forcing participants to catalogue and explicate their idea.
Additionally, the act generally leads to deadlines which can help prod
individuals to work on the project more regularly.

### Resolution

Writing down this pattern clarifies the importance of creating a guide
for your idea if you want others to adopt it for use.[^2] If people
complain that they are confused, now we know why.

### What’s Next

Working with our shepherd at PLoP to improve this paper![^3]

![Design sketch for possible updated Peeragogy project dashboard (image
by Amanda Lyons, used with
permission).](figures/peeragogy_dashboard_draft1/peeragogy_dashboard_draft1.jpg)

[^1]: We started the Peeragogy project by collaboratively making an
    outline for the Peeragogy Handbook. We recommended this
    handbook-making practice to others, as a way to learn
    collaboratively and build a strong group.

[^2]: As [Richard
    Stallman](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-doc.html) wrote about
    free software documentation: “The biggest deficiency in free
    operating systems is not in the software—it is the lack of good free
    manuals that we can include in these systems. Many of our most
    important programs do not come with full manuals. Documentation is
    an essential part of any software package; when an important free
    software package does not come with a free manual, that is a major
    gap.”

[^3]: Regarding connections with programming per se: we are not
    currently making software in the Peeragogy project, but we do
    continually evaluate and assemble software tools to support our
    activities. We often run into “bottleneck” problems; see
    <span>**Carrying capacity**</span>. The better we are able to
    exposit the problems we’re dealing with, the more likely it is that
    our high-level analysis (and synthesis) has the potential to inform
    future programming work.




Newcomer
========

### Context

A lot of “education” assumes we are speaking to a new generation. In
learning more broadly, the “audience” is often new to the topic.
Sometimes we are the <span>**Newcomers**</span>, sometimes we’re the
oldtimers.

### Problem

<span>**Newcomers**</span> can feel overwhelmed by the amount of things
to learn. They don’t know where to start.[^1] They may have a bunch of
ideas that the oldtimers have never considered – or they may think they
have new ideas, which are actually a different take on old ideas; see
<span>**Use or Make**</span>.

### Solution

It is good to try to become aware of what a <span>**Newcomer**</span>
needs, and what their motivations are.[^2] <span>**Newcomers**</span>
themselves may have only a general idea about what their goals are, so
it can be helpful to add concreteness with <span>**A Specific
Project**</span>.

### Rationale

<span>**Newcomers**</span> in the Peeragogy project have often
complained about feeling confused about what the project is about,
suggesting that our <span>**Roadmap**</span> has not been sufficiently
clear. Some feel it is too theoretical, which suggests we need to do
more work on <span>**Creating a guide**</span> on ways to get involved,
while also making it clear that we do not have an exhaustive list in
mind. New ideas can prompt us to consider how we may have been limiting
ourselves.[^3]

### Resolution

The frustration and confusion felt by a <span>**Newcomer**</span>
familiar to anyone who is starting something new. An awareness of how to
help <span>**Newcomers**</span> can help us be more compassionate to
ourselves and others.

### What’s Next

A more detailed (but non-limiting) “How to Get Involved” walk-through in
text or video form would be good to develop. We can start by listing
some of the things we’re learning about.[^4]

[^1]: Peeragogy Project participant Régis Barondeau: “I joined this
    handbook project late, making me a ‘newcomer’. When I started to
    catch up, I rapidly faced doubts: Where do I start? How can I help?
    How will I make it, having to read more than 700 posts to catch up?
    What tools are we using ? How do I use them? Etc. Although this
    project is amazingly interesting, catching the train while it
    already reached high speed can be an extreme sport. By taking care
    of newcomers, we might avoid losing valuable contributors because
    they don’t know how and where to start, and keep our own project on
    track.”

[^2]: Peeragogy Project participant Charlotte Pierce: “Joe was working a
    lot on the book, and I thought ‘this is interesting hard work, and
    he shouldn’t have to do this alone.’ As a Peeragogy newcomer, I was
    kindly welcomed and mentored by Joe, Howard, Fabrizio, and others. I
    asked naive questions and was met with patient answers, guiding
    questions, and resource links. Concurrently, I bootstrapped myself
    into a position to contribute to the workflow by editing the live
    manuscript for consistency, style, and continuity.”

[^3]: Dilrukshi Gamage, Julia Echeverria, and Federico Monaco first
    joined a Peeragogy hangout in February, 2015. They were all
    interested in the idea of designing and running a course on peer
    learning. Although we had done some work on a syllabus, and
    considered the notion of using peeragogical models in formal
    education, we hadn’t tried running a course on the topic of
    peeragogy. There were a number of earlier experiments that *used*
    ideas from peeragogy inside of a formal course, and the difference
    between these two approaches prompted interesting discussions.

[^4]: Business issues relevant to the Peeragogy project, how to run a
    MOOC, hot-syncing our website from Git, etc.




Pattern Audit Routine
=====================

### Context

As a collection of patterns grows, some of them may lose relevance.

### Problem

Not all of the patterns are equally relevant and some will become
completely irrelevant as a project evolves.

### Solution

It is important to “tune” and “prune” the collection of patterns. Bring
a real-time aspect to debugging individual patterns using the following
five-part “[Paragogical Action
Review](http://metameso.org/~joe/docs/The-Paragogical-Action-Review.pdf)”
@peeragogy-handbook [Chapter 28]: (1) Review what was supposed to
happen. (2) Establish what is happening/happened. (3) Determine what’s
right and wrong with what we are doing/have done. (4) What did we learn
or change? (5) What else should we change going forward?

After asking these five questions with respect to progress made with any
pattern, the pattern will likely become clearer and/or show its
irrelevance. Periodically run a full audit of the pattern catalog. After
a thorough review, any patterns that cannot be revised to become
relevant for our current interests can be moved to the
<span>**Scrapbook**</span>.

### Rationale

We want to keep the attention focused on the most relevant issues.

### Resolution

This pattern reminds us to improve our patterns, and presents a method
for refocusing.

### What’s Next

Regularly go through the <span>**Pattern Audit Routine**</span> in our
future meetings.




Scrapbook
=========

### Context

We’ve maintained and revised our pattern catalog over a period of years.

### Problem

Some of the patterns don’t seem to lead to concrete next steps.

### Solution

We’ve created a <span>**Scrapbook**</span> for patterns that are no
longer part of the active catalog.[^1] It’s worth remembering how we got
to the point we’re at now, and the thinking that developed along the
way, so the <span>**Scrapbook**</span> shows some patterns that seemed
like a good idea at the time – and brief notes about why we no longer
need them explicitly. We can use the <span>**Pattern Audit
Routine**</span> to decide when to move a pattern into the
<span>**Scrapbook**</span>.

### Rationale

We want our collection of patterns to be concretely useful and actively
used. It needs to be clear and pragmatic, and not overly theoretical or
prescriptive. If we don’t see “what’s next” and where it came from, then
it’s probably time to shift focus to something else more practical.

### Resolution

After noticing that the idea of a <span>**Scrapbook**</span> can help us
focus and help us present our work to others, we’ve decided to “retire”
several patterns that seemed overly abstract or redundant as well as
several antipatterns that didn’t suggest concrete next steps, and
instead simply held a prism to our collective frustrations with the slow
pace of a distributed volunteer project.[^2] The current catalog is
leaner and redescribes our project in an action-oriented way.

### What’s next

After significantly pruning back the pattern catalog, we want it to grow
again: new patterns are needed. Reviewing the contents of the
<span>**Scrapbook**</span> will be one place to look for inspiration,
but there are others.[^3]

[^1]: See <http://paragogy.net/Pattern_Scrapbook>. Note that the
    patterns in our <span>**Scrapbook**</span> use a slightly different
    template to the one we’ve currently adopted.

[^2]: Retired patterns: <span>**Discerning a pattern**</span>,
    <span>**Polling for ideas**</span>, <span>**Moderation**</span>,
    <span>**Roles**</span>. Retired antipatterns:
    <span>**Isolation**</span>, <span>**Magical thinking**</span>,
    <span>**Messy with Lurkers**</span>, <span>**Misunderstanding
    Power**</span>, <span>**Navel Gazing**</span>,
    <span>**Stasis**</span>, <span>**Stuck at the Level of Weak
    Ties**</span>.

[^3]: The <span>**Scrapbook**</span> could potentially be called an
    “<span>**Icebox**</span>” to emphasize that the patterns it contains
    may prove useful at a later date. Symmetrically, one of the tasks of
    the <span>**Wrapper**</span> should be to maintain a
    “<span>**Backlog**</span>” of proto-patterns, in the form of
    outstanding problems and issues.




Distributed Roadmap
===================

> This section reprises the “What’s Next” steps in all the previous
> patterns, offering another view on the project
> **Roadmap** in its emergent form.

### ▶ Peeragogy project

Feel free to join us and suggest new patterns and projects, or adapt our
patterns to help shape another **Peeragogy Project**.

### ▶ Roadmap

Adding “What’s Next” steps to our patterns gives us a “distributed
roadmap.” And this works both ways: If we sense that something needs to
change about the project, that is a clue that we might need to record a
new pattern.

### ▶ Use or make

We’ve spun off the pattern catalog from the *Peeragogy Handbook* into
this paper, sharing it with a new community and gaining new
perspectives. Let’s look for other parts of the handbook we can spin
off!

### ▶ Carrying capacity

This pattern catalog has been rewritten in a way that should make it
easy for anyone to add new patterns. Making it easy and fruitful for
others to get involved is one of the best ways to redistribute the load
(compare the **Newcomer** pattern).

### ▶ A specific project

Each project connected with the Peeragogy project should be described
with one or more patterns, each with specific, tangible “what’s next”
steps. The **Pattern Audit Routine** can help make these
“what’s next” steps concrete.

### ▶ Wrapper

We need better practices for automating the wrapping-up process. One of
the latest ideas is to develop a simple visual “dashboard” for the
project that would be a web page people could access and immediately get
an idea of what work is ongoing in the project with links for going more
in depth and/or contributing.

### ▶ Heartbeat

Identifying and fostering new **Heartbeats** and new
working groups is a task that can help make the community more robust.
This is the temporal dimension of spin off projects described in
**Use or Make**.

### ▶ Creating a guide

Working with our shepherd at PLoP to improve this paper!


### ▶ Newcomer

A more detailed (but non-limiting) “How to Get Involved” walk-through in
text or video form would be good to develop. We can start by listing
some of the things we’re learning about.

### ▶ Pattern Audit Routine

Regularly go through the **Pattern Audit Routine** in our
future meetings.

### ▶ Scrapbook

After significantly pruning back the pattern catalog, we want it to grow
again: new patterns are needed. Reviewing the contents of the
**Scrapbook** will be one place to look for inspiration,
but there are others.
# SWATS


> Learning to use technology with peers – the case of Students With
> Abilities in Technology (SWATs).

Part 1: Introduction
--

Mind-amplifying technologies <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>, technologies
of cooperation <span>[</span>2<span>]</span>, such as conversation
technologies, as well as visualization tools, video and photo edition
software, simulators or programming technologies are emerging learning
tools in schools around the world. They are affordable and accessible
enough to design learning environments. Latin America is no exception
and it is fast becoming the norm to find convergent technology in the
classroom.

We challenged students to develop a three-level game with a score or
marker using Scratch, a program developed by the MIT. This program
allows you to develop computer programs using modules or blocks of
instructions. The educational value of this tool lies not in its ease of
use but in its nature as an authentic learning environment and ideal
context for developing intellectual skills.

Once students have developed their programs and documented the process
in a learning log, we asked them if they had faced problems in handling
Scratch. In this way we were able to identify which students had
difficulties in developing programs and what their problems were in the
process of choosing instructions.  However, we’re also able to identify
those students with particular technical skills.  We call them Students
With Abilities in Technology (SWATs).  In case of difficulty, SWATs can
be called in, and can decide if they want to give advice to peers and
the teacher in the use of Scratch.

The idea of identifying these students and asking them to support their
peers and teachers in specific tasks has an additional educational
component. It is clear that when a student is given the task of
explaining or advising peers or teachers, he develops new competences
and masters, to an even greater extent, those competences for which
he/she was selected as SWAT.

We have observationally determined that this approach is relevant to the
widespread use of digital devices in academic tasks and its extended
application contributes to a more positive use of digital technologies
for learning. We see how, as the use of technology in all learning
environments becomes general, this approach of peer learning becomes an
alternative to underpin the work of teachers. The figure of the SWAT in
the classroom also enables a different form of relationship between
pairs that generate new forms of interaction and learning that we can
appraise and evaluate.

Part 2. Representation as a pattern
--

Here’s how the above case could be described using the pattern template
that we’ve presented in the book.  This may help others use the same
model — or at least understand how it works in practice in more detail.
 Further questions may come to mind, which the reader can try to answer
by transforming or extending the pattern in their own context.

#### Title:

Students With Abilities in Technology (SWAT)

#### Definition:

Private and public schools increasingly have digital devices in
classrooms with Internet access (laptops, desktops, tablets, cell
phones, etc.) and teachers with little or no expertise in the
educational use of such devices.  However, some of the students have
considerable background with these kinds of tools.  They can help the
teachers and other students.

#### Problem:

In general, teachers have multiple deficiencies in the adoption of
emerging technologies. Their lack of expertise prevents them from
realizing the full potential that technology has as a relevant
pedagogical mediation.  The rate of change in the school context,
however, is not coupled to the rate of change in  current teacher
training programs. This lack of pedagogical training is having a majorly
disruptive impact in the classroom given this presence of technological
devices in the classroom.  The reaction of administrators and teachers
to the proliferation of devices is, in a significant number of cases,
rejection and stigmatization of emerging technologies. The cause of this
rejection is that teachers ignore the educational potential of
technology. They ignore how technology has changed the cognitive model
of a whole generation.  Having technical specialists to support the work
of the teacher in the classroom is unthinkable from an economic
standpoint.

#### Solution:

The students themselves can be the solution to this problem. Some have
superior technical knowledge and this is usually wasted. Teachers can
incorporate them as assistants to help them and their peers. A student
with digital skills can be the agent of change that many teachers need
in order to learn how to use technology for the design of learning
environments.  This empowered group of students, that we named SWAT
(Students With Abilities in Technology) support teachers and peers with
lower-level digital competences. Support from students with technical
knowledge could mean a significant change in the learning process,
because teachers can now combine that knowledge with their teaching
experience and pedagogical strategies. The result of this can be the
discovery of the many possibilities technology has for the construction
of knowledge and the development of new intellectual abilities.

In our work with middle school students (ages 12-14), the support of
SWATs inside and outside the classroom was a very positive experience.
At the beginning of each course students are required to develop
projects involving the use of technology. Students who show a greater
competence in the use of technical tools are invited to join as SWAT.
Once SWATs are identified, they are asked regarding the possibility of
supporting teachers and their peers in the use of specific computer
tools. It is impressive to see teachers becoming co-learners who take
advantage of this privileged status of their students to master tools
that promote their ability to redesign learning environments.  When
students need support for developing their projects, SWATs show them
strategies to accomplish them. The majority report great pleasure and
pride in their new role as peer advisors.

#### Challenges arising in practice:

This peeragogical approach changes the prevailing educational paradigm
through collaboration between teachers and students, and among students
themselves.  There are many possible points of friction.  To have one or
more SWATs in each learning group transforms the way in which teachers
and students interact with each other and with available technologies,
but, again, can create challenges for teachers who may be used to a more
“banking” style of teaching.

#### What’s next:

Can we find mentors for the SWATs to help them become even better with
technology?  Can we find other ways to reward these students?  At the
same time, can the idea be applied across the curriculum, and across
other competencies, to involve more students in the peer-teaching role?

References
-

1.  Howard Rheingold (2012), “Mind Amplifier: Can Our Digital Tools Make
    Us Smarter?”

2.  Instute of the Future (2005), “[Technology of
    cooperation](http://www.rheingold.com/cooperation/Technology_of_cooperation.pdf)”


# Convening


> So you’ve decided you want to try peer learning? Maybe you’ve already
> found a few people who will support you in this effort.
> Congratulations! It’s time now to focus your thinking. How will you
> convene others to form a suitable group? How will you design a learner
> experience which will make your project thrive? In this chapter, we
> suggest a variety of questions that will help you to make your project
> more concrete for potential new members. There are no good or bad
> answers - it depends on the nature of your project and the context.
> Trying to answer the questions is not something you do just once. At
> various stages of the project, even after it’s over, some or all of
> those questions will aquire new meanings - and probably new answers.

> **Fabrizio Terzi**: “There is a force of attraction that allows
> aggregation into groups based on the degree of personal interest; the
> ability to enhance and improve the share of each participant; the
> expectation of success and potential benefit.”

Group identity
--

Note that there are many groups that may not need to be “convened”,
since they already exist. There is a good story from [A. T.
Ariyaratne](http://www.sarvodayausa.org/learn/a-t-ariyartne/) in his
[collected
works](http://www.sarvodaya.org/about/philosophy/collected-works-vol-1/rural-self-help)
in which he does “convene” a natural group (a village) - but in any
case, keep in mind at the outset that the degree of group-consciousness
that is necessary for peer learning to take place is not fixed. In this
section, we suppose you are just at the point of kicking off a project.
What steps should you take? We suggest you take a moment to ponder the
following questions first - and revisit them afterward, as a way to
identify best practices for the next effort.

There will be a quiz
--

Those taking the initiative should ask themselves the traditional Who,
What, Where, When, Why, and How. ([Simon
Sinek](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simon_Sinek) suggests to begin with
Why, and we touched on Who, above!). In doing so, preliminary
assumptions for design and structure are established. However, in peer
learning it is particularly important to maintain a healthy degree of
openness, so that future group members can also form their answers on
those questions. In particular, this suggests that the design and
structure of the project (and the group) may change over time. Here, we
riff on the traditional 5W’s+H with six clusters of questions to help
you focus your thinking about the project and amplify its positive
outcomes.

Expectations for participants
--

**1. Who: Roles and flux**

-   What are some of the roles that people are likely to fall into (e.g.
    Newcomer, Wrapper, Lurker, Aggregator, etc.)?
-   How likely is it that participants will stick with the project? If
    you expect many participants to leave, how will this effect the
    group and the outcome?
-   Do you envision new people joining the group as time goes by? If so,
    what features are you designing that will support their integration
    into an existing flow?
-   Will the project work if people dip in and out? If so, what features
    support that? If not, how will people stay focused?

**2. What: Nature of the project**

-   What skills are required? What skills are you trying to build?
-   What kinds of change will participants undergo? Will they be heading
    into new ground? Changing their minds about something? Learning
    about learning?
-   What social objective, or “product” if any, is the project aiming to
    achieve?
-   What’s the ‘hook?’ Unless you are working with an existing group, or
    re-using an existing modality, consistent participation may not be a
    given.

**3. When: Time management**

-   What do you expect the group to do, from the moment it convenes, to
    the end of its life-span, to create the specific outcome that will
    exist at the conclusion of its last meeting? [2] Note that what
    people ACTUALLY do may be different from what you envision at the
    outset, so you may want to revisit this question (and your answer)
    again as the project progresses.
-   Keeping in mind that at least one period of is inertia is very
    likely [2], what event(s) do you anticipate happening in the group
    that will bring things back together, set a new direction, or
    generally get things on track? More generally, what kinds of
    contingencies does your group face? How does it interface to the
    “outside world”?
-   What pre-existing narratives or workflows could you copy in your
    group?
-   How much of a time commitment do you expect from participants? Is
    this kind of commitment realistic for members of your group?
-   What, if anything, can you do to make participation “easy” in the
    sense that it happens in the natural flow of life for group members?
-   Does everyone need to participate equally? How might non-equal
    participation play out for participants down the line?

**4. Where: Journey vs Destination**

-   What structures will support participants in their journey to the
    end result(s) you (or they) have envisioned? What content can you
    use to flesh out this structure?
-   Where can the structure “flex” to accommodate unknown developments
    or needs as participants learn, discover, and progress?

**5. Why: Tool/platform choice**

-   What tools are particularly suited to this group? Consider such
    features as learning styles and experiences, geographical diversity,
    the need for centralization (or de-centralization), cultural
    expectations related to group work, sharing, and emerging
    leadership.
-   Is there an inherent draw to this project for a given population, or
    are you as facilitator going to have to work at keeping people
    involved? How might your answer influence your choice of tools? Is
    the reward for completion the learning itself, or something more
    tangible?
-   In choosing tools, how do you prioritize such values and objectives
    as easy entry, diverse uses, and high ceilings for sophisticated
    expansion?

**6. How: Linearity vs Messiness**

-   How will your group manage feedback in a constructive way?
-   Why might participants feel motivated to give feedback?
-   How firm and extensive are the social contracts for this group? Do
    they apply to everyone equally, or do they vary with participation
    level?
-   What do people need to know at the start? What can you work out as
    you go along? Who decides?
-   How welcome are “meta-discussions”? What kinds of discussions are
    not likely to be welcome? Do you have facilities in place for
    “breakout groups” or other peer-to-peer interactions?
    (Alternatively, if the project is mostly distributed, do you have
    any facilities in place for coming together as a group?)

Cycles of group development


The above questions remain important thoughout the life of the project.
People may come and go, particpants may propose fundamentally new
approaches, people may evolve from lurkers to major content creators or
vice-versa. The questions we suggest can be most effective if your group
discusses them over time, as part of its workflow, using synchronous
online meetings (e.g., [Big Blue Button](http://www.bigbluebutton.org/),
[Adobe
Connect](http://success.adobe.com/en/na/sem/products/connect/1109_6011_connect_webinars.html?sdid=IEASO&skwcid=TC\textbar{}22191\textbar{}adobe%20connect\textbar{}\textbar{}S\textbar{}e\textbar{}5894715262),
[Blackboard
Collaborate](http://www.blackboard.com/platforms/collaborate/overview.aspx)),
forums, Google docs, wikis, and/or email lists. Regular meetings are one
way to establish a “heartbeat” for the group.

In thinking about other ways of structuring things, note that the “body”
of the *Peeragogy Handbook* follows a [Tuckman-like
outline](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forming-storming-norming-performing)
(*Convening a Group* is our “forming”, *Organizing a Learning Context*
is our “storming and norming”, *Co-working/Facilitation* is our
“performing”, and *Assessment* is our “adjourning”). But we agree with
Gersick <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>, and Engeström
<span>[</span>2<span>]</span>, that groups do not always follow a linear
or cyclical pattern with their activities!

Nevertheless, there may be some specific stages or phases that you want
*your* group to go through. Do you need some “milestones,” for example?
How will you know when you’ve achieved “success?”

In closing, it is worth reminding you that it is natural for groups to
experience conflict, especially as they grow or cross other threshold
points or milestones - or perhaps more likely, when they don’t cross
important milestones in a timely fashion (ah, so you remember those
milestones from the previous section!). Nevertheless, there are some
strategies can be used to make this conflict productive, rather than
merely destructive (see Ozturk and Simsek
<span>[</span>3<span>]</span>).

References
-

1.  Gersick, C. (1988). Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new
    model of group development. *Academy of Management Journal* 31
    (Oct.): 9-41.

2.  Engeström, Y. (1999). Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing
    cycles of knowledge creation in practice. In Y. Engeström, R.
    Miettinen & R.-L-. Punamäki (Eds.), *Perspectives on activity
    theory*, (pp. 377-404). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

3.  Ozturk and Simsek (2012). “Of Conflict in Virtual Learning
    Communities in the Context of a Democratic Pedagogy: A paradox or
    sophism?,” in *Proceedings of the Networked Learning Conference,
    2012, Maastricht.*
    ([Video](http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/fass/edres/seminars/Ozturk300311.htm)
    or
    [text.](http://networkedlearningconference.org.uk/abstracts/pdf/ozturk.pdf))


# Play

Once more we’re back to the question, “What makes learning fun?” There
are deep links between play and learning. Consider, for instance, the
way we learn the rules of a game through playing it. The first times we
play a card game, or a physical sport, or a computer simulation we test
out rule boundaries as well as our understanding. Actors and
role-players learn their roles through the dynamic process of
performance. The resulting learning isn’t absorbed all at once, but
accretes over time through an emergent process, one unfolding further
through iterations. In other words, the more we play a game, the more we
learn it.

In addition to the rules of play, we learn about the subject which play
represents, be it a strategy game (chess, for example) or simulation of
economic conflict. Good games echo good teaching practice, too, in that
they structure a single player’s experience to fit their regime of
competence (cf. Vygotsky’s zone of proximal learning, a la Gee
<span>[</span>1<span>]</span>). That is to say a game challenges players
at a level suited to their skill and knowledge: comfortable enough that
play is possible, but so challenging as to avoid boredom, eliciting
player growth. Role-playing in theater lets performers explore and test
out concepts; see Boal <span>[</span>2<span>]</span>. Further, adopting
a playful attitude helps individuals meet new challenges with
curiousity, along with a readiness to mobilize ideas and practical
knowledge. Indeed, the energy activated by play can take a person beyond
an event’s formal limitations, as players can assume that play can go on
and on <span>[</span>3<span>]</span>.

> **Douglas Thomas and John Seely Brown**: “All systems of play are, at
> base, learning systems.” <span>[</span>4<span>]</span>

Games have always had a major social component, and learning plays a key
role in that interpersonal function. Using games to build group cohesion
is an old practice, actually a triusm in team sports.

It is important to locate our peeragogical moment in a world where
gaming is undergoing a renaissance. Not only has digital gaming become a
large industry, but gaming has begun to infiltrate non-gaming aspects of
the world, sometimes referred to as “gamification.” Putting all three of
these levels together, we see that we can possibly improve co-learning
by adopting a playful mindset. Such a playful attitude can then mobilize
any or all of the above advantages. For example,

-   Two friends are learning the Russian language together. They invent
    a vocabulary game: one identifies an object in the world, and the
    other must name it in Russian. They take turns, each challenging the
    other, building up their common knowledge.
-   A middle-aged man decides to take up hiking. The prospect is
    somewhat daunting, since he’s a very proud person and is easily
    stymied by learning something from scratch. So he adopts a “trail
    name”, a playful pseudonym. This new identity lets him set-aside his
    self-importance and risk making mistakes. Gradually he grows
    comfortable with what his new persona learns.
-   We can also consider the **design** field as a useful kind of
    playful peeragogy. The person *playing the role* of the designer can
    select the contextual frame within which the design is performed.
    This frame can be seen as the *rules* governing the design, the
    artifact and the process. These rules, as with some games, may
    change over time. Therefore the possibility to adapt, to tailor
    one’s activities to changing context is important when designing
    playful learning activities. (And we’ll look at some ways to design
    peer learning experiences next!)

Of course, “game-based learning” can be part of standard pedagogy too.
When peers create the game themselves, this presumably involves both
game-based learning and peer learning. Classic strategy games like
[Go](http://senseis.xmp.net/?MythOfOrigin) and
[Chess](http://www.amazon.com/Chess-Success-Using-Strengths-Children/dp/0767915682)
also provide clear examples of peer learning practices: the question is
partly, what skills and mindsets do our game-related practices really
teach?

> **Socrates**: “No compulsory learning can remain in the soul …In
> teaching children, train them by a kind of game, and you will be able
> to see more clearly the natural bent of each.”

### Exercises that can help you cultivate a playful attitude

-   Use the [Oblique Strategies](http://www.rtqe.net/ObliqueStrategies/)
    card deck (Brian Eno and Peter Schmidt, 1st edition 1975, now
    available in its fifth edition) to spur playful creativity. Each
    card advises players to change their creative process, often in
    surprising directions.
-   Take turns making and sharing videos. This online collaborative
    continuous video storytelling involves a group of people creating
    short videos, uploading them to YouTube, then making playlists of
    results. Similar to [Clip Kino](http://clipkino.info/), only online.
-   Engage in theater play using Google+ Hangout. e.g. coming together
    with a group of people online and performing theatrical performances
    on a shared topic that are recorded.

References
-

1.  Gee, J. P. (1992). *The social mind: Language, ideology, and social
    practice*. Series in language and ideology. New York: Bergin &
    Garvey.

2.  Boal, A. (1979). *Theatre of the oppressed*. 3rd ed. London: Pluto
    Press.

3.  Bereiter, C. and Scadamalia, M. (1993). *Surpassing ourselves, an
    inquiry into the nature and implications of expertise*. Peru,
    Illinois: Open Court.

4.  Douglas Thomas and John Seely Brown (2011), *A New Culture of
    Learning: Cultivating the Imagination for a World of Constant
    Change*. CreateSpace.

5.  Malone, T.W. (1981), Toward a Theory of Intrinsically Motivating
    Instruction, *Cognitive Science*, 4, pp. 333-369


# K-12 Peeragogy


Teachers have a reputation of working in isolation, of keeping their
learning to themselves and on their own islands. They are also known for
generously sharing resources with one another. It is this latter trait
that is becoming increasingly important as the role of the educator
continues to expand. As educational technology research specialist
Stephen Downes
[observes](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/stephen-downes/the-role-of-the-educator_b_790937.html),
the expectations on teachers have grown from “being expert in the
discipline of teaching and pedagogy…<span>[</span>to needing to
have<span>]</span> up-to-date and relevant knowledge and experience in
it. Even a teacher of basic disciplines such as science, history or
mathematics must remain grounded, as no discipline has remained stable
for very long, and all disciplines require a deeper insight in order to
be taught effectively.” It is no longer possible for an educator to work
alone to fulfil each of these roles: the solution is to work and learn
in collaboration with others. This is where peer-based sharing and
learning online, connected/networked learning, or peeragogy, can play an
important role in helping educators.

Becoming a connected/networked learner
--

The following steps are set out in ‘phases’ in order to suggest possible
experiences one may encounter when becoming connected. It is
acknowledged that every learner is different and these ‘phases’ only
serve as a guide.

### Phase 1: Deciding to take the plunge

To help educators begin to connect, the [Connected Educator’s Starter
Kit](http://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fdl.dropbox.com%2Fu%2F38904447%2Fstarter-kit-final.pdf&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNE9sNo1Lz9-zJ0KH48djXeYVoAF4A)
was created during Connected Educator’s Month in August 2012. This
article previews the main steps. The first step to becoming a ‘connected
educator-learner’ involves making the commitment to spending the time
you’ll need to learn how to learn and share in an open, connected
environment.

### Phase 2: Lurking

We start off as lurkers. A learner can be considered a true ‘lurker’
after reviewing the starter kit, establishing a digital presence
(through a blog or a wiki) or signing up for Twitter and creating a
basic profile containing a photo. In this phase, lurkers will begin to
[‘follow’ other users on
Twitter](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.fractuslearning.com%2F2012%2F05%2F25%2Ftwitter-follow-education-technology%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNF8grPMuRwU_ImW9Jk3ZYrg0m9KgQ)
and observe [educational Twitter
‘chats’](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fcybraryman.com%2Fchats.html&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFJASZiwfvPbfOzFbHvAunpXfNC1g).
Lurkers will also begin to seek out other resources through
[blogs](http://theinnovativeeducator.blogspot.ca/2012/04/ten-best-education-blogs.html),
[Facebook](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.edsocialmedia.com%2F2011%2F02%2Fthe-advantage-of-facebook-groups-in-education%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEvc43Q7GqJqS-2S8GhEJ53Ye-j4Q),
[Edmodo](http://www.slideshare.net/cmsdsquires/edmodo-for-teachers-guide)
and
[LinkedIn](http://www.emergingedtech.com/2012/02/8-great-linkedin-groups-for-educators/)
groups.

### Phase 3: Entering the fray

The lurker begins to develop into a connected educator-learner once he
or she makes the decision to enter into a dialogue with another user.
This could take the form of a personal blog post, participation on an
education-related
[blog](http://edudemic.com/2012/08/education-blogs/?utm_medium=twitter&utm_source=twitterfeed)
or
[wiki](http://educationalwikis.wikispaces.com/Examples+of+educational+wikis)
or a an exchange with another Twitter user. Once this exchange takes
place, relationships may begin to form and the work towards building a
Personal Learning Network (PLN) begins.

One such site where such relationships can be built is [Classroom
2.0](http://www.classroom20.com/), which was founded by [Steve
Hargadon.](http://www.stevehargadon.com/) Through Classroom 2.0, Steve
facilitates a number of free online learning opportunities including
weekly [Blackboard
Collaborate](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.futureofeducation.com%2Fnotes%2FPast_Interviews&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHVYOvP-w7NTgKp2Fu2AX4YycnPQQ)
sessions, conferences, book projects and grassroots cross-country
educational-transformation tours. Classroom 2.0 also offers a supportive
Social Ning—a free, social learning space that provides online
conferences and synchronous and recorded interviews with inspirational
educators—for connected educator-learners around the world.

### Phase 4: Building and shaping your PLN

Just as not every person one meets becomes a friend, it is important to
remember that not every exchange will lead to a co-learning peeragogy
arrangement. It may be sufficient to follow another who provides useful
content without expecting any reciprocation. It is dependent on each
educator-learner to determine who to pay attention to and what learning
purpose that individual or group will serve. It is also up to the
learner-educator to demonstrate to others that he or she will actively
participate.

There are a number of
[strategies](http://storify.com/digiphile/how-to-build-a-personal-learning-network-on-twitte)
one can use when shaping the PLN to learn. However, one of the best ways
educators can attract a core of *peeragogues* is by sharing actively and
demonstrating active and open learning for others.

There are a number of sites where a new educator-learner can actively
and openly learn. In addition to personal blogging and wikis, other
professional development opportunities include open, online courses and
weekly synchronous online meetings through video, podcasts or other
forms of media.

Examples include: [Connected Learning
TV](http://connectedlearning.tv/howard-rheingold-social-media-and-peer-learning-mediated-pedagogy-peeragogy),
[TechTalkTuesdays](http://techtalktuesdays.global2.vic.edu.au/),
[VolunteersNeeded](http://learning2gether.pbworks.com/w/page/32206114/volunteersneeded),
[SimpleK12](http://simplek12.com/webinars), [K12
Online,](http://k12onlineconference.org/)
[CEET](http://www.learnnowbc.ca/educators/moodlemeets/default.aspx), and
[EdTechTalk](http://edtechtalk.com/taxonomy/term/130).

Alternatively, courses are offered with
[P2PU’s](https://p2pu.org/en/schools/school-of-ed-pilot/) School of
Education or a wide variety of other opportunities collected by
[TeachThought](http://www.teachthought.com/) and Educator’s CPD online.
Peggy George, the co-faciliator of the weekly Classroom 2.0 LIVE
Sessions, created a livebinder package of free ‘[PD On
Demand](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.livebinders.com%2Fplay%2Fplay_or_edit%3Fid%3D429095&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHCIdRn64rPwske2vP7xrpWolb-jA)’
connected professional development online options for peeragogy
enthusiasts.

### Stage 5: Extending the digital PLN and connecting face-to-face

Over time, once the connected educator-learner has established a refined
PLN, these peeragogues may choose to shift their learning into physical
learning spaces. Some options available for these educator-learners
would include the new ‘grassroots unconferences’, which include examples
such as: [EduCon](http://educonphilly.org/),
[EdCamps](http://davidwees.com/content/what-edcamp),
[THATcamp](http://thatcamp.org/) and
[ConnectedCA](http://connectedcanada.org/).

These (un)conferences are free or extremely low-cost and focus on
learning from and with others. These ‘unconferences’ are typically
publicized through Twitter, Google Apps, and Facebook. Connecting
face-to-face with other peeragogues can strengthen bonds to learning
networks and help to promote their sustainability.

Postscript
-

Sylvia Tolisano, Rodd Lucier and Zoe Branigan-Pipen co-created an
[infographic](http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8160/7161689001_9b6725a4ca_h.jpg)
that which explores the experiences individuals may encounter in the
journey to become connected learners through another related sequence of
steps: *Lurker*, *Novice*, *Insider*, *Colleague*, *Collaborator*,
*Friend*, and *Confidant*.  Googlize it, and have a look at our
[Recommended Readings](http://peeragogy.org/recommended-reading/) for
some additional resources.

# P2P SOLE


> From this conversational piece you can engage in a journey to affect
> your learning space through many points of entry interacting with the
> physical one. We hope to inspire emerging structure and reciprocal
> mentoring to create a ripple effect for those willing to open the door
> to a new possible world.

The Guiding Strategy:


In his [Peeragogical Case
Study](http://peeragogy.org/case-study-5ph1nx/) David Preston states:

> *Peeragogical interaction requires refining relational and topical
> critique, as well as skills in other “meta” literacies, including but
> not limited to critical thinking, collaboration, conflict resolution,
> decision-making, mindfulness, patience and compassion.*

A [Self-Organizing Learning
Environment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self_Organised_Learning_Environment),
or SOLE, with a living structure accomplishes all of these outcomes, or
David’s “meta-literacies,” simultaneously. An authentic problem and/or
project based activity in a connected learning environment includes
diverse learners in diverse ways by empowering all learners as peers.

This provides the authentic learning environment with which to design a
SOLE. SOLEs are everywhere. How have we evolved as a species, if not
through self-organizing? A conversation between strangers is self
organizing, each learning about something
or each other. The spaces around people conversing is also an
environment, though not explicitly a learning one. While we are always
self-organizing to learn or accomplish things, one place that SOLEs do
not always exist are in learning institutions. In many educational
institutions, our learning environments are predominately organized by
the teacher, curriculum, or society. How can we nurture peer to peer
learning environments to organize? How does the role of the teacher
differ in a SOLE? In what ways can we unite that fundamental, passionate
human characteristic of curiosity and self-organizing back into our
Learning Environments?

![image](images/sole-u.jpg)



> A visualization of the facilitated peer to peer SOLE, full-size at <http://goo.gl/7StkJK>




The model that [Sugata Mitra](http://sugatam.wikispaces.com/)
<span>[</span>2<span>]</span> is experimenting with gives us some
scaffolding to create one ourselves. This is the goal of his [SOLE Tool
Kit](http://www.ted.com/pages/sole_toolkit) (3). Sugata’s kit is
directed towards children between 8 and 12 years old. I was wondering if
there is a way to make it more universal in its application. How can I
apply it to my situation? How is a SOLE different in the context of peer
to peer learning? This chapter of the Handbook uses Sugata’s model as a
doorway into our understanding a SOLE approach to peer to peer learning.
Its three key components are: learners, context and project. I find the
discussion needs to integrate what we are learning about diverse
learners into a [Universal Design for
Learning](http://www.udlcenter.org/aboutudl/udlguidelines)
<span>[</span>4<span>]</span> context. After all, we cannot take for
granted who the peers are in the SOLE. Equally, the context, the
learning environment (LE) must be as deeply considered as the learners
participating. As a learning designer, I am also seeking more clues
about the living structure of a well crafted SOLE.

Centers within the Center
-

SOLEs exist in a particular context. Take Sugata’s [hole in the
wall](http://www.ted.com/talks/sugata_mitra_shows_how_kids_teach_themselves.html)
<span>[</span>5<span>]</span> experiment. The parameters of the
environment of a computer embedded in a wall in India are very specific.
Sugata’s act was to design a project in order to facilitate a process
within that environment. The elements he introduced were a touch screen
computer embedded in a wall with specific software. Sugata has
abstracted this design into a Tool Kit. He speaks of ‘Child Driven
Learning’, intrinsically motivated learning with the curiosity to learn
something in particular. As a learner-centric peeragogy, SOLEs are
emergent, bottom up, seeking to answer: How do we design a project (or
phrase a problem) that ignites a learner’s passion?

A SOLE is a facilitated learning environment (LE) that can nurture
learner driven activity. For instance, in the Hole in the Wall example,
the design is the context of the wall, the street, the neighborhood –and
the facilitation is the touch screen monitor in the wall. They are
brilliantly united. In this sense it is an intentional, self-aware
learning environment. It is a strange foreign object that anyone would
have to figure out how it works to take advantage of. But this is not in
the classroom, or in the ‘school.’ It is an informal LE. Just like
[learning a
game](http://www.academia.edu/1137269/Game-based_Learning_and_Intrinsic_Motivation)
<span>[</span>6<span>]</span>, there is an entire ecology that surrounds
you. This is very much a systemic approach. The context is facilitated
explicitly (your design of the SOLE), but also implicitly in the [hidden
curriculum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_curriculum)
<span>[</span>7<span>]</span> that defines your LE. Above is the layout
of the [transformed learning
environment](http://www.scribd.com/doc/181089012/Transformed-Learning-Environment-Analysis)
<span>[</span>8<span>]</span> I explored to work around the hidden
curriculum of the traditional classroom. The LE has a tremendous, if not
[overwhelming influence, on
learning](http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-09232007-220306/unrestricted/SElmasryETDbodytext.pdf)
<span>[</span>9<span>]</span>. The first step in connected learning is
to reconnect to the environment around us. For me, the primary context
of my LE is a performing arts center at a small rural liberal arts
college. The Performing Arts Center is a Center within the context of
the college and community. A diversity of spaces within the facility are
inhabited: small and cozy, large and public, technology embedded
everywhere, all focused on the project based learning that emerges
producing a performance. I stay away from a formal classroom as much as
possible. These spaces are Centers within the Center, ‘[loosely
connected adaptive complex
systems](http://nourdiab.wordpress.com/2011/02/23/the-theories-of-christopher-alexander/)’
<span>[</span>10<span>]</span> within themselves, just like people. I
believe that the possibility of a SOLE emerging as a living structure
seems to depend on the correct types of complex systems engaged in the
LE.

What is the role of the internet in your design? Mitigating inequalities
and accommodating diverse learners are somewhat assisted by access to
the internet. But it is the immediate, [just-in-time
learning](http://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2013/10/02/just-in-time-information-hacks)
<span>[</span>11<span>]</span> that makes free and open access to the
world wide web so important in a SOLE. Wireless is available throughout
this LE. Nooks and lounges, interconnected, but separate rooms, provide
lots of places for collaboration or solitary work, for staying connected
or hiding out. In a UDL vision of a facilitated peer to peer SOLE,
technology is integral to the design. In the case of my LE, with the use
of digital audio, multi-media, database management, robotic lighting and
[dichroic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dichroic_filter)
<span>[</span>12<span>]</span> colors, learners are accustomed to
accessing and augmenting reality with technology: allowing learners to
access their social media is part of their content creation.

Do we start our SOLE as peers? Peer to peer assumes your participants
are peers–especially you, the facilitator. There needs to be enough
diversity and complexity to include all learners, engendering a
[Universally Designed
Context](http://www.cast.org/library/UDLguidelines/)
<span>[</span>13<span>]</span>. What is the role of diversity in peer to
peer SOLE building? How are diverse learners peers? In my LE, I
discovered 70% of my learners have learning challenges. I know my LE is
not unique in this regard. I have to facilitate a SOLE design that is
inclusive. This is in contradistinction to commonality, yet this
diversity is what we crave, for creativity and innovation, for deep
learning to occur. Crafting your SOLE using multiple means of
representation, expression and engagement empowers learners to be peers.
A diverse learning environment, supporting diverse learning styles and
diverse learners, supports a complex project based SOLE. But there are
many SOLEs within the SOLE since learning is occurring on many levels
with each student and within each group. We do not all get the same
thing at the same time. Learning outcomes are diverse, emergent,
serendipitous.

What type of project, problem or event will focus your efforts? Either a
[learner generated syllabus
<span>[</span>](http://www.theatreprof.com/2011/active-learning-student-generated-syllabus/)14<span>]</span>
may emerge from the SOLE, or a [user generated
education](http://usergeneratededucation.wordpress.com/)
<span>[</span>15<span>]</span> within a specific context may answer this
question. Ownership and leadership emerge when learners can apply their
creativity and/or authentically assist each other in a common goal.
Opportunities to design and modify even small things will draw learners
into a project. The more they must rely on each other, collaborate and
share their creativity, their designs and actualization–the more they
work together as peers. The spaces in your LE are most likely already
designed and built to accommodate the purpose of the facility in the
context of the college or school. We cannot really redesign the actual
space, but we can redesign many aspects. We can look for designs within
it. Being able to design your own space, or project, is critical to
taking ownership of your learning and experiencing the consequences. As
learners mature and look for ways to be more involved, I suggest they
redesign the shop, the repertory lighting plot, or the procedures of
their department and/or SOLE overall. Exchanging roles as designer also
stimulates peer interaction. Why not integrate design and design
thinking? In my context, lighting, scene, costume and sound design are
interconnected opportunities. Along with accompanying technology, every
opportunity is used to nurture empathy, creativity, rationality and
systems thinking. Integral to the learner generated syllabus or project
design should be continuous artifact creation. A great place to start
the design process and to begin to generate content is by using a
virtual world.

Constant content creation can integrate assessment into your SOLE. It is
the quality of the artifacts created along the way that reveals the
success of your SOLE. Media that chronicles a journey through time,
created by each learner, reveals the depth of participation. It is
nearly impossible to cheat. The learner expresses their comprehension in
the types and extent of artifact creation.

As the facilitator, I look for opportunities to introduce the
unexpected, bigger questions, deeper considerations, along the way. For
example, in the context of my LE, one of the events feature Tibetan
Monks. They bring a counterpoint to the inflated egos and cult of
personality which is prevalent in our context. The SOLE Plan is
extended. It can happen over a much longer amount of time than one class
or one day. The actors rehearse for weeks, as the design team designs,
giving time for: research, absorption, misleads, mistakes, correction
and reflection. A SOLE needs time and persistence to generate artifacts,
documentation and experiences of the project and virtual worlds are an
excellent way to extend time and space synchronously and asynchronously.

Sugata emphasizes the Big questions. We do not always know what they
are. A focus? A goal? A product? And the event? That should be decided
with the group. The learners intuit the direction that leads to deep
engagement and the bigger questions. I try and leave it ambiguous,
suggesting some of the things they might encounter. Facilitating the
SOLE in this context, we face endless questions connected to the
specific LE, to all the imaginary scenarios, Herculean tasks and
questions– like building castles, programming a digital sound console,
troubleshooting robotic lighting instruments, how to make the illusion
of fire or, even, who killed Charlemagne? The Box Office is an example
of an informal SOLE that has emerged recurrently over time. I have
noticed that its vitality depends on the characters and the ebb and flow
of learners entering the group or graduating. The physical space is a
small, windowless and often damp room with a couple of couches and a
desk with a computer squeezed in. My very own ‘Hole in the Wall’
experiment. The bottom of the door can remain closed, while the top is
open, like a stable. Primarily the students are paid to be there,
answering the phone, reserving tickets, greeting patrons and managing
the Box Office and the Front of the House. In the SOLE, this subtle
inversion of the institutional value proposition turns ‘work study’ into
studying work. This is an informal LE nested within the context of the
formal institution and the wider LE: a center within a center. Some
semesters there are business majors working their way up the job ladder:
Usher to Assistant Front of House Manager, to Assistant Box Office
Manager, to Box Office Manager. Sometimes this takes 4 years, sometimes
it happens in a semester or two. It is a recursive SOLE that differs as
the interests and skills of the students who inhabit the space change.
As the current manager puts it, the Box Office is a ‘constantly evolving
puzzle.’

This example of a SOLE in an informal LE is similar to the other types
of SOLE’s that occur within a facilitated LE. The learner’s interact as
reciprocal apprentices, leaning on one another to solve challenges and
problems. Groups are self-selective, this type of work suits their
temperament and interests, or time. This cohort is almost a clique,
attracting their boyfriends and girlfriends. They begin initiatives,
re-design the lobby for crowd control, redecorate and rearrange the
space constantly, decide their schedules and split up responsibility.
Everyone is always training everyone, because the environment turns over
each semester. It is explicitly an informal LE. The workers are
students. This inverts the usual state of affairs, where essentially
they are being paid to learn, though they may not even be aware of it.
Occasionally, the learning experience resonates deeply with them. A
number of them have used the experience to leverage jobs that parallel
their interests, or get them started on their careers.

Job titles, roles of responsibility, are often problematic in a SOLE.
The bottom line is that as peers we are all equal and at certain times
everyone is expected to do everything regardless of their roles. Titles
go to people’s heads. But this is part of the experience. Keep the
titles moving, change it up when things get bottlenecked over
personalities. Sometimes I create duplicate positions, Assistants of
Assistants. and Department Heads. The Apprenticeship model is at play
but in a new way in a SOLE. There are peers and there are peers. As
power struggles emerge, some like-to-like grouping occurs. The role of
the facilitator becomes mediator. The emergent epistemology of abundance
and connected learning asks for a multitude of ‘experts.’ In the same
way, leadership can be distributed, flowing as varying needs arise.

The experience of practicing leadership skills and encountering all the
variables of working with diverse folks quickly gives feedback to us if
this is a helpful role for this person. It is messy sometimes, and there
are conflicts. After a few events, they learn how to manage a Box
Office, dealing with patrons, emergencies, complaints and bag check.
They confront the larger peer group, the student body, with authority
and empathy. They are very proud of their jobs and make their own name
tags with titles. A hierarchy gives them rewards that they have been
trained to expect from years in school. It is another way of developing
intrinsic motivation and challenges them to interact with their peers
authentically.

As facilitator, I try to leave them alone as much as possible. The
context has been created, the computer in the wall is on a desk.
Extending the design of your SOLE contributes to its living structure. I
have used [Facebook as a Supplemental
LMS](http://community.telecentre.org/profiles/blogs/facebook-as-a-supplemental-lms)
<span>[</span>16<span>]</span> since 2007 because this is where my
students are and it allows them to control the structures of groups
emergently. The learners create the groups as they are relevant. The
facilitator does not. Usually they invite me in! For now, Facebook
aggregates the learning community that the SOLE inspires as learners
become leaders, establish connections with each other and mentor
newbies. This activity is integrated into artifact creation, ‘comments’
and documentation of their personal learning journey. Facebook becomes a
precursor for their portfolios, and in some cases, it is their
portfolio. [Reciprocal
Apprenticeships](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Reciprocal_apprenticeship)
<span>[</span>17<span>]</span> occur in the dynamic of collaboration
among peers. Continuity in time beyond the event horizon is accomplished
by these relationships. Peers nurture one another along the shared
learning journey that the SOLE provides. As facilitator and designer,
you are, most of all, in a reciprocal relationship with the other
learners. This is the essence of being a peer, an interaction that
respects what each of us brings to the experience.

A review
--

> **Sugata Mitra**: It is great to see the thinking that has gone into
> taking the idea of a SOLE forward. To my mind, SOLEs are quite
> experimental at this time and efforts such as these will provide
> invaluable data. I look forward to this. I notice that most of the
> important design features of a SOLE are incorporated into the article.
> I repeat them anyway, just to emphasise:
>
> 1.  Large, publicly visible displays are very important, this is what
>     resulted in the surprising results in the hole in the wall
>     experiments and subsequent SOLEs for children in England and
>     elsewhere.
>
> 2.  The absence of unnecessary people in the learning space, no matter
>     who they are; parents, teachers, principals, curious adults etc.
>
> 3.  Free, undirected activity, conversation and movement.
>
> 4.  A certain lack of order: I must emphasise that ‘Self Organised’,
>     the way I use it does not mean ‘organising of the self’. Instead
>     it has a special meaning from the subject, Self Organising
>     Systems, a part of Chaos Theory. The SOLE should be a space at the
>     ‘edge of chaos’, thereby increasing the probability of the
>     appearance of ‘emergent order’.
>
References
-

1.  Preston, David (2014). [Case Study:
    5PH1NX](http://peeragogy.org/case-study-5ph1nx/) (pp. –, this
    volume).

2.  [About Sugata Mitra](http://sugatam.wikispaces.com/), on Wikispaces.

3.  [The SOLE Toolkit](http://www.ted.com/pages/sole_toolkit), on
    TED.com.

4.  National Center for Universal Design for Learning, [Universal Design
    for Learning
    Guidelines](http://www.udlcenter.org/aboutudl/udlguidelines).

5.  Sugata Mitra (2010). [The child-driven
    education](http://www.ted.com/talks/sugata_mitra_the_child_driven_education.html),
    TED.

6.  [Game-based Learning and Intrinsic Motivation by Kristi
    Mead](http://www.academia.edu/1137269/Game-based_Learning_and_Intrinsic_Motivation).

7.  [Hidden Curriculum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_curriculum),
    on Wikipedia.

8.  [Transformed Learning Environment
    Analysis](http://www.scribd.com/doc/181089012/Transformed-Learning-Environment-Analysis),
    by Jan Herder (on ScribD).

9.  Elmasry, Sarah Khalil (2007). [Integration Patterns of Learning
    Technologies](http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-09232007-220306/unrestricted/SElmasryETDbodytext.pdf).
    IRB\# 05-295-06.

10. Curious: [In-Forming singular/plural design, The Theories of
    Christopher
    Alexander](http://nourdiab.wordpress.com/2011/02/23/the-theories-of-christopher-alexander/).

11. [Overwhelmed with Blog Tips? Hack Learning with Just In Time
    Information](http://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2013/10/02/just-in-time-information-hacks),
    on Wordstream.com.

12. [Dichroic Filter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dichroic_filter), on
    Wikipedia.

13. [UDL Guidelines](http://www.cast.org/library/UDLguidelines/) on
    cast.org.

14. [Active Learning Student Generated
    Syllabus](http://www.theatreprof.com/2011/active-learning-student-generated-syllabus/),
    on theatreprof.com.

15. [User Generated Education
    Blog](http://usergeneratededucation.wordpress.com/) on
    wordpress.com.

16. [Facebook as a Supplemental
    LMS](http://community.telecentre.org/profiles/blogs/facebook-as-a-supplemental-lms),
    on telecentre.org.

17. [Reciprocal
    Apprenticeship](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Reciprocal_apprenticeship),
    on Star Wars Wikia.


# Organizing


This section about organizing Co-Learning rests on the assumption that
learning always happens in a context, whether this context is a
structured “course” or a (potentially) less structured “learning space”.
For the moment we consider the following division:

-   *Organizing Co-learning Contexts*
    -   Courses (“linked to a timeline or syllabus”)
    -   Spaces (“not linked to a timeline or syllabus”)

This section focuses on existing learning contexts and examines in
detail how they have been “organized” by their .  At a “meta-level” of
development, we can talk about this parallel structure:

-   *Building Co-learning Platforms*
    -   Development trajectories (e.g. “design, implement, test,
        repeat”)
    -   Platform features (e.g. forums, wikis, ownership models, etc.)

A given learning environment with have both time-like and space-like
features as well as both designed-for and un-planned features. A given
learning platform will encourage certain types of engagement and impose
certain constraints. The question for both “teachers” and “system
designers” – as well as for learners – should be: *what features best
support learning?*

The answer will depend on the learning task and available resources.

For example, nearly everyone agrees that the best way to learn a foreign
language is through immersion. But not everyone who wants to learn, say,
French, can afford to drop everything to go live in a French-speaking
country. Thus, the space-like full immersion “treatment” is frequently
sacrificed for course-like treatments (either via books, CDs, videos, or
ongoing participation in semi-immersive discussion groups).

System designers are also faced with scarce resources: programmer time,
software licensing concerns, availability of peer support, and so forth.
While the ideal platform would (magically) come with solutions
pre-built, a more realistic approach recognizes that problem solving
always takes time and energy. The problem solving approach and
associated “learning orientation” will also depend on the task and
resources at hand. The following sections will develop this issue
further through some specific case studies.

Case Study 1: “Paragogy” and the After Action Review.
--

In our analysis of our experiences as course organizers at P2PU, we (Joe
Corneli and Charlie Danoff) used the US Army’s technique of After Action
Review (AAR). To quote from [our
paper](http://paragogy.net/ParagogyPaper2)
<span>[</span>2<span>]</span>:

> As the name indicates, the AAR is used to review training exercises.
> It is important to note that while one person typically plays the role
> of evaluator in such a review <span>[</span>…<span>]</span> the review
> itself happens among peers, and examines the operations of the unit as
> a whole.
>
> The four steps in an AAR are:
>
> 1.  Review what was supposed to happen (training plans).
>
> 2.  Establish what happened.
>
> 3.  Determine what was right or wrong with what happened.
>
> 4.  Determine how the task should be done differently the next time.
>
> The stated purpose of the AAR is to “identify strengths and
> shortcomings in unit planning, preparation, and execution, and guide
> leaders to accept responsibility for shortcomings and produce a fix.”

We combined the AAR with our paragogy principles –

1.  Changing context as a decentered center.

2.  Meta-learning as a font of knowledge.

3.  Peers provide feedback that wouldn’t be there otherwise.

4.  Paragogy is distributed and nonlinear.

5.  Realize the dream if you can, then wake up!

and went through steps 1-4 for each principle to look at how well it was
implemented at P2PU. This process helped generate new policies that
could be pursued further at P2PU or similar institutions. By
presenteding our paper at the [Open Knowledge Conference
(OKCon)](http://okfn.org/okcon/), we were able to meet P2PU’s executive
director, Philipp Schmidt, as well as other highly-involved P2PU
participants; our feedback may ultimately have contributed to shaping
the development trajectory for P2PU.

In addition, we developed a strong prototype for constructive engagement
with peer learning that we and others could deploy again. In other
words, variants on the AAR and the paragogical principles could be
incorporated into future learning contexts as platform features
<span>[</span>3<span>]</span> or re-used in a
design/administration/moderation approach
<span>[</span>4<span>]</span>.  For example, we also used the AAR to
help structure our writing and subsequent work on
[paragogy.net](http://paragogy.net).

Case Study 2: Peeragogy, Year One.
-

We surveyed members of the Peeragogy community with questions similar to
those used by Boud and Lee <span>[</span>1<span>]</span> and then
identify strengths and shortcomings as we did with the AAR above.

Questions


These were discussed, refined, and answered on an etherpad: revisions to
the original set of questions, made by contributors, are marked in
italics.

1.  Who have you learned with or from in the Peeragogy project? *What
    are you doing to contribute to your peers’ learning?*

2.  How have you been learning during the project?

3.  Who are your peers in this community, and why?

4.  What were your expectations of participation in this project? *And,
    specifically, what did you (or do you) hope to learn through
    participation in this project?*

5.  What actually happened during your participation in this project (so
    far)? *Have you been making progress on your learning goals (if any;
    see previous question) – or learned anything unexpected, but
    interesting?*

6.  What is right or wrong with what happened (Alternatively: how would
    you assess the project to date?)

7.  How might the task be done differently next time? (What’s “missing”
    here that would create a “next time”*, “sequel”, or
    “continuation”?*)

8.  *How would you like to use the Peeragogy handbook?*

9.  *Finally, how might we change the questions, above, if we wanted to
    apply them in your peeragogical context?*

### **Reflections on participants’ answers**

Some of the tensions highlighted in the answers are as follows:

1.  *Slow formation of “peer” relationships.* There is a certain irony
    here: we are studying “peeragogy” and yet many respondents did not
    feel they were really getting to know one another “as peers”, at
    least not yet. Those who did have a “team” or who knew one another
    from previous experiences, felt more peer-like in those
    relationships. Several remarked that they learned less from other
    individual participants and more from “the collective” or “from
    everyone”. At the same time, some respondents had ambiguous feelings
    about naming individuals in the first question: “I felt like I was
    going to leave people out and that that means they would get a bad
    grade - ha!” One criterion for being a peer was to have built
    something together, so by this criterion, it stands to reason that
    we would only slowly become peers through this project.

2.  *“Co-learning”, “co-teaching”, “co-producing”?* One respondent
    wrote: “I am learning about peeragogy, but I think I’m failing
    <span>[</span>to be<span>]</span> a good peeragogue. I remember that
    Howard <span>[</span>once<span>]</span> told us that the most
    important thing is that you should be responsible not only for your
    own learning but for your peers’ learning.
    <span>[</span>…<span>]</span> So the question is, are we learning
    from others by ourselves or are we <span>[</span>…<span>]</span>
    helping others to learn?” Another wrote: “To my surprise I realized
    I could contribute organizationally with reviews, etc. And that I
    could provide some content around PLNs and group process. Trying to
    be a catalyst to a sense of forward movement and esprit de corps.”

3.  *Weak structure at the outset, versus a more “flexible” approach.*
    One respondent wrote: “I definitely think I do better when presented
    with a framework or scaffold to use for participation or content
    development. <span>[</span>…<span>]</span> (But perhaps it is just
    that I’m used to the old way of doing things).” Yet, the same person
    wrote: “I am interested in <span>[</span>the<span>]</span>
    applicability <span>[</span>of pæragogy<span>]</span> to new models
    for entrepreneurship enabling less structured aggregation of
    participants in new undertakings, freed of the requirement or need
    for an entrepreneurial visionary/source/point person/proprietor.”
    There is a sense that some confusion, particularly at the beginning,
    may be typical for peeragogy. With hindsight, one proposed
    “solution” would be to “have had a small group of people as a cadre
    that had met and brainstormed before the first live session
    <span>[</span>…<span>]</span> tasked
    <span>[</span>with<span>]</span> roles
    <span>[</span>and<span>]</span> on the same page”.

4.  *Technological concerns.* There were quite a variety, perhaps mainly
    to do with the question: how might a (different) platform handle the
    tension between “conversations” and “content production”? For
    example, will Wordpress help us “bring in” new contributors, or
    would it be better to use an open wiki? Another respondent noted the
    utility for many readers of a take-away PDF version. The site
    (peeragogy.org) should be “<span>[</span>a<span>]</span> place for
    people to share, comment, mentor and co-learn together in an ongoing
    fashion.”

5.  *Sample size.* Note that answers are still trickling in. How should
    we interpret the response rate? Perhaps what matters is that we are
    getting “enough” responses to make an analysis. One respondent
    proposed asking questions in a more ongoing fashion, e.g., asking
    people who are leaving: “What made you want to quit the project?”

Discussion
-

> **Lisewski and Joyce**: In recent years, the tools, knowledge base and
> discourse of the learning technology profession has been bolstered by
> the appearance of conceptual paradigms such as the ‘five stage
> e-moderating model’ and the new mantra of ‘communities of practice’.
> This paper will argue that, although these frameworks are useful in
> informing and guiding learning technology practice, there are inherent
> dangers in them becoming too dominant a discourse. [5]

Instead of a grand narrative, Peeragogy is a growing collection of case
studies and descriptive patterns.  As we share our experiences and make
needed adaptations, our techniques for doing peer learning and peer
production become more robust. Based on the experiences described above,
here are a few things people may want to try out in future projects:

-   “Icebreaking” techniques or a “buddy system”; continual  refactoring
    into teams.
-   Maintain a process diagram that can be used to “triage” new ideas
    and effort.
-   Prefer the “good” to the “best”, but make improvements at the
    platform level as needed.
-   Gathering some information from everyone who joins, and, if
    possible, everyone who leaves.

References
-

1.  Boud, D. and Lee, A. (2005). [‘Peer learning’ as pedagogic discourse
    for research
    education](http://manainkblog.typepad.com/faultlines/files/BoudLee2005.pdf).
    *Studies in Higher Education*, 30(5):501–516.

2.  Joseph Corneli and Charles Jeffrey Danoff,
    [Paragogy](http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-739/paper_5.pdf), in Sebastian
    Hellmann, Philipp Frischmuth, Sören Auer, and Daniel Dietrich
    (eds.), *Proceedings of the 6th Open Knowledge Conference, Berlin,
    Germany, June 30 & July 1, 2011*,

3.  Joseph Corneli and Alexander Mikroyannidis (2011). [Personalised and
    Peer-Supported Learning: The Peer-to-Peer Learning Environment
    (P2PLE)](http://greav.ub.edu/der/index.php/der/article/view/188/330),
    *Digital Education Review*, 20.

4.  Joseph Corneli, [Paragogical
    Praxis](http://paragogy.net/ParagogicalPraxisPaper), *E-Learning and
    Digital Media* (ISSN 2042-7530), Volume 9, Number 3, 2012

5.  Lisewski, B., and P. Joyce (2003). Examining the Five Stage
    e-Moderating Model: Designed and Emergent Practice in the Learning
    Technology Profession, *Association for Learning Technology
    Journal*, 11, 55-66.


# Adding structure

In the introduction to “Organizing a Learning Context”, we remarked that
a “learning space” is *only potentially* less structured than a
“course”.  For example, a library tends to be highly structured, with
quiet rooms for reading, protocols for checking out books, a cataloging
and shelving system that allows people to find what they are looking
for, as well as rules that deter vandalism and theft. (Digital libraries
don’t need to play by all the same rules, but are still structured.)

But more structure does not always lead to better learning. In a 2010
Forbes article titled, “The Classroom in 2020,” George Kembel describes
a future in which “Tidy lectures will be supplanted by messy real-world
challenges.” The Stanford School of Design, (or “d.school” – which
Kemble co-founded and currently directs) is already well-known for its
open collaborative spaces, abundant supply of Post-It notes and markers,
and improvisational brainstorm activities – almost the opposite of
traditional lecture-based learning.

One “unexpected benefit” of dealing with real-world challenges is that
we can change our approach as we go.  This is how it works in peer
learning: peers can decide on different structures not just once (say,
at the beginning of a course), but throughout the duration of their time
together. This way, they are never “stuck” with existing structures,
whether they be messy or clean. At least… that’s the ideal.

In practice, “bottlenecks” frequently arise.  For example, in a digital
library context, there may be bottlenecks having to do with software
development, organizational resources, community good will, or access to
funding – and probably all of the above.  In a didactic context, it may
be as simple as one person knowing something that others do not.

While we can’t eliminate scarcity in one stroke, we can design
activities for peer learning that are “scarcity aware” and that help us
move in the direction of adaptive learning structures.

Planning Peer Learning Activities


We begin with two simple questions:

-   How do we select an appropriate learning activity?
-   How do we go about creating a learning activity if we don’t find an
    existing one?

“Planning a learning activity” should mean planning
an *effective* learning activity, and in particular that means something
that people can and will engage with.  In short, an appropriate learning
activity may be one that you already do!  At the very least, current
activities can provide a “seed” for even more effective ones.

But when entering unfamiliar territory, it can be difficult to know
where to begin.  And remember the bottlenecks mentioned above?  When you
run into difficulty, ask yourself: [why is this
hard?](http://peeragogy.org/patterns-and-heuristics/)  You might try
adapting [Zed Shaw’s task-management
trick](http://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/intro.html#comment-409972596),
and make a list of limiting factors, obstacles, etc., then cross off
those which you can find a strategy to deal with (add an annotation as
to why).  For example, you might decide to overcome your lack of
knowledge in some area by hiring a tutor or expert consultant, or by
putting in the hours learning things the hard way (Zed would
particularly approve of this choice).  If you can’t find a strategy to
deal with some issue, presumably you can table it, at least for a while.

Strategic thinking like this works well for one person. What about when
you’re planning activities for someone else?  Here you have to be
careful: remember, this is peer learning, not traditional “teaching” or
“curriculum design”.  The first rule of thumb for *peer learning* is:
don’t plan activities for others unless you plan to to take part as a
fully engaged participant.  Otherwise, you might be more interested in
the literature on *collaborative learning*, which has often been
deployed to good effect within a standard pedagogical context (see
e.g. Bruffee <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>).  In a peer learning
setting, everyone will have something to say about  “what do you need to
do” and “why is it hard,” and everyone is likely to be interested in
everyone else’s answer as well as their own.

Furthermore, different participants will be doing different things, and
these will “hard” for different reasons. Part of *your* job is to try to
make sure all of the relevant roles are covered by someone and to try to
make sure that they’re getting enough support.

One scenario: building activities for the Peeragogy Handbook


Adding a bunch of activities to the handbook won’t solve all of our
usability issues, but more activities would help.  We can think about
each article or section from this perspective:

1.  When looking at this piece of text, what type of knowledge are we
    (and the reader) trying to gain?   Technical skills, or abstract
    skills?  What’s the point?

2.  What’s difficult here?  What might be difficult for someone else?

3.  What learning activity recipes or models might be appropriate? (See
    e.g. <span>[</span>2<span>]</span>, <span>[</span>3<span>]</span>.)

4.  What customizations do we need for this particular application?

*** *As a quick example: designing a learning activity for the current
page**

1.  *We want to be able to come up with effective learning activities to
    accompany a “how to” article for peer learners*

2.  *It might be difficult to “unplug” from all the reading and writing
    that we’re habituated to doing.*

3.  *But there are lots and lots of ways to learn.*

4.  *Therefore, the proposed handbook activity is to simply step away
    from the handbook for a while.*

5.  **Look for some examples of peer learning in everyday life.  When
    you’ve gained an insight about peer learning from your own
    experience, come back and create a related activity to accompany
    another handbook page!**

References
-

1.  Bruffee, Kenneth A. (1984). “Collaborative learning and the
    conversation of mankind.” *College English* 46.7, 635-652

2.  [KS ToolKit](http://www.kstoolkit.org/KS+Methods) from
    kstoolkit.org.

3.  [Designing Effective and Innovative
    Sources](http://serc.carleton.edu/NAGTWorkshops/coursedesign/tutorial/strategies.html) (particularly
    the section on “Teaching Strategies for Actively Engaging Students
    in the Classroom”)


# The student authored syllabus


In either formal learning, informal learning or models which transition
between the two, there are many opportunities for learners to co-create
the syllabus and/or outline their own course of action. The *sage on the
stage* of formal instruction must become at the most *a guide on the
side* who acts as a coach appearing only when needed rather than as a
lecturer who determines the content that the learners need to master. In
the following inspirational but certainly not prescriptive examples, we
will focus on co-learning methods drawn from a Social Constructivist
perspective, which fits nicely here.

We offer a few examples below to show a range of learner centered
approaches. They all are based on co-learners hosting each other for one
of a number of digestible topics in the larger subject area or domain
that the group formed in order to explore. This can take place across a
number of media and timelines.

The following methods will result in each co-learner gaining deep
knowledge in a specific topic and moderate knowledge across several
topics. The unique joy of this approach is that no two cohorts will ever
be the same. The content will always be fresh, relevant, and changing. A
group can even reconvene with slightly or dramatically different topics
over and over using the same underlying process.

The appropriateness of the learner-created syllabus technique depends on
two factors: 1) the involvement of experts in the group and 2) the level
of proficiency of the group. In general, novices who may or may not have
a deep interest in the subject matter benefit from more structure and
experts who point to key concepts and texts. An example of this is the
university survey course for first or second year students who, we
assume, need more guidance as they enter the subject matter. Graduate
seminars are generally much more fluid, open dialogues between motivated
experts require little structure or guidance.

We also need effective methods for groups which contain novices,
experts, and everyone in between. In groups with a wide range of
expertise, it is important that each co-learner chooses to focus their
deep inquiry on a topic that they are less familiar with. This will
*even out* the expertise level across the cohort as well as ensure that
a co-learner is neither bored nor dominating the dialogue.

3 example designs to structure the learning
-

### Weekly topics structure

One way to structure the course is to have each co-learner host a topic
each week. Perhaps multiple students host their topics in the same week.
This progression provides a rotation of presentations and activities to
support the entire group in engaging with the topics and challenges to
the thinking of the presenters in a constructive and respectful manner.

> *Pro:* co-learners have discrete timelines and manageable chunks of
> responsibility.
>
> *Con:* the format may become disjointed, and the depth of inquiry will
> likely be somewhat shallow.

### Milestone based structure

In this structure, each co-learner host their topics in parallel with
similar activities and milestones that the whole group moves through
together. Milestones can be set for a certain date, or the group can
*unlock* their next milestone whenever all participants have completed
the previous milestone. This second milestone timeline can be great for
informal groups where participation levels may vary from week to week
due to external factors, and the sense of responsibility and game-like
levels can be motivating for many co-learners.

Each co-learner may start with a post of less than 500 words introducing
the topic on a superficial level. When everyone has done this, the group
might move on to posting questions to the post authors. Then, there may
be a summary post of the activity so far with critical recommendations
or insights.

> *Pro:* co- learners have more time to digest a topic, formulate a
> complex schema, and generate deeper questions.
>
> *Con:* it will be a few weeks before the topic level schema can form
> into a broader understanding of the subject matter or domain (seeing
> the big picture takes longer).

### Relay learning structure.

This is similar to the milestone structure. However, co-learners rotate
topics. If one learner posts an introductory write-up on a topic the
first cycle, they may be researching questions on another topic in the
next cycle, posting a summary in a third, and then posting a summary on
their original topic in the fourth.

> *Pro:* co-learners can experience responsibility for several topics.
>
> *Con:* co-learners may receive a topic that is poorly researched or
> otherwise neglected.

Content
-

### A vast number of topics

Within a subject of mutual interest to a group, there are a considerable
number of topics or questions. What is important is that each co-learner
can take responsibility for a reasonably narrow area given the duration
of the course or the timeline of the group. Areas that are too broad
will result in a very superficial understanding, and areas that are too
narrow will result in a dull experience. For example, in marine biology,
topics such as “the inter-tidal zone” may be too broad for a course
cycle of a few weeks. Narrowing to one species may be too specific for a
course over a few months.

### Learner generated topics

Most cohorts will have some knowledge of the shared area of interest or
an adjacent area. It is a good idea to respect the knowledge and
experience that each member of the group brings to the table. A
facilitator or coordinator may generate a list of potential topic areas,
setting an example of the scale of a topic. We suggest that the
participants in the group are also polled for additions to the list. In
large courses, sending out a Google Form via email can be an effective
way to get a quick list with a high response rate.

### Expert informed topics

If there is no expert facilitator in the group, we suggest that the
cohort begin their journey with a few interviews of experts to uncover
what the main buzz words and areas of focus might be. One way to locate
this type of expert help is through contacting authors in the subject
matter on social networks, reviewing their posts for relevance, and
reaching out with the request.

We recommend two people interview the expert over video chat, for
example in a Hangout. One person conducts the interview, and one person
takes notes and watches the time. We strongly suggest that the interview
be outlined ahead of time:

> *Warm up*: Who are you, what are your goals, and why do you think this
> interview will help?
>
> *Foundational questions*: Ask a few questions that might elicit short
> answers to build rapport and get your interviewee talking.
>
> *Inquiry*: What people say and what they do can often be very
> different. Ask about topics required for mastery of the subject matter
> (e.g. What are the areas someone would need to know about to be
> considered proficient in this subject?). Also, ask [questions that
> require
> storytelling](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_Incident_Technique).
> Avoid [superlative](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superlative) or
> [close-ended
> questions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closed-ended_question).
>
> *Wrap up*: Thank the interviewee for his or her time, and be sure to
> follow up by sharing both what you learned and what you accomplished
> because he or she helped you.

Shared goals and group norms
-

### Choosing useful outputs

Getting together for the sake of sharing what you know in an informal
way can be fairly straightforward and somewhat useful. Most groups find
that a common purpose and output that are explicitly defined and
documented help to engage, motivate, and drive the group. For the
examples above, the group may decide to create a blog with posts on the
various topics or create a wiki where they can share their insights.
Other outputs can include community service projects, business
proposals, recommendations to senior management or administration, new
products, and more. The key is to go beyond sharing for sharing sake and
move toward an output that will be of use beyond the co-learning group.
This activity is best described in
[Connectivist](http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/connectivism.htm)
theory as the special case of networked learning where we find evidence
of learning in collective action and/or behavioral change in groups
rather than a psychological or neurological process in individuals.

### Group cohesion (a.k.a. the rules of the road)

One challenge of this kind of collaboration is that each group will need
to decide on norms, acceptable practices and behaviors. Culturally
diverse groups in particular may run into communication or other issues
unless there is a way to create shared expectations and communicate
preferences.

One way to do this is with a team charter. This is a living document
where the initial rules of engagement can live for reference. The group
may add or edit this document over time based on experience, and that is
a welcome thing! This documentation is a huge asset for new members
joining the group who want to contribute quickly and effectively. Any
co-editing word processing program will work, but we strongly recommend
something that can be edited simultaneously and that lives in the cloud.
(Google Docs is convenient because you can also embed your Charter into
another site.)

Try starting with the following three sections, and allow some time for
the group to co-edit and negotiate the document between icebreakers and
kicking off the official learning process.

> *Mission:* Why are you forming the group? What do you want to
> accomplish together?
>
> *Norms:* Use
> [netiquette](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netiquette#Netiquette)? No
> [flaming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flaming_%28Internet%29)? Post
> your vacation days to a [shared
> calendar](http://support.google.com/calendar/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=36598)?
> Cultural norms?
>
> *Members:* It is useful to include a photo and a link to a public
> profile such as Twitter, Google+ or Facebook.

Assessments and feedback loops


### Co-authored assessment rubrics

Tests. Quizzes. Exams. How can the co-learning group assess their
performance?

These types of courses benefit from an approach similar to coaching. Set
goals as individuals and a group in the beginning, define what success
looks like, outline steps that are needed to achieve the goal, check in
on the goal progress periodically, and assess the results at the end of
the course against the goal criteria. Goals may include domain
expertise, a business outcome, a paper demonstrating mastery, a
co-created resource, or even the quality of collaboration and adherence
to shared group norms.

### Learner created assessments

Another effective way to create an assessment is to decide on an
individual or group output and create a peer assessment rubric based on
the goals of the individual or group.

One way to create a rubric is to spend some time defining the qualities
you want your output to have based on positive examples. Perhaps a group
wants to create a blog. Each person on the team may identify the
qualities of a great blog post based on examples that they admire. They
can use that example to create a criteria for assessment of co-learner
authored blog posts. We recommend that the criteria have a 0 to 5 point
scale with 0 being non-existent and 5 being superb. Writing a few
indicators in the 1, 3, and 5 columns helps to calibrate reviewers.

Create a [shared
document](https://support.google.com/drive/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=143213&topic=21010&ctx=topic),
perhaps starting with a list of criteria. Collapse similar criteria into
one item, and create the indicators or definitions of 1, 3, and 5 point
performance. Agree on the rubric, and decide on how the co-learners will
be assigned assessment duties. WIll everyone review at least two others?
Will each co-learner product need at least 3 reviewers before it goes
live? Will you use a
[spreadsheet](https://support.google.com/drive/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=141195&topic=20329&ctx=topic)
or a
[form](http://support.google.com/drive/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=87809)
to collect the assessments?

In a university setting, the instructor of record may wish to approve a
peer assessment rubric, and it is sometimes a good idea to have a few
outside experts give feedback on criteria that the group may have
missed.

### Outside assessments

It is possible that an instructor of record or similar authority will
create the assessment for performance. In these cases, it is crucial
that the co-learners have access to the grading rubric ahead of time so
that they can ensure their activities and timeline will meet any
requirements. In this case, it may be possible to require that the
co-learners self-organize entirely, or there may be intermediary
assignments such as the charter, project plan or literary review.

Cyclical use of these models
-

### So much more to learn

As mentioned above, the joy of this type of learning is that no two
groups will ever do it the same. Their process, goals, and outcomes can
all be unique. As designers and facilitators of this type of learning
environment, we can say it is a wild ride! Each class is exciting,
refreshing, and on trend. The co-learners become our teachers.

If a group generates more topics than it is possible to cover at one
time given the number of group members or if a group has plans to
continue indefinitely, it is always possible to set up a system where
potential topics are collected at all times. These unexplored topics can
be harvested for use in another learning cycle, continuing until the
group achieves comprehensive mastery.

Risks
--

This format is not without its own unique pitfalls: some challenges are
learner disorientation or frustration in a new learning structure with
ambiguous expectations and uneven participation. Some groups simply
never gel, and we do not know why they have failed to achieve the
cohesion required to move forward. Other groups are the exact opposite.
Here are a few risks to consider if you would like to try the methods
suggested here and how to mitigate them.

> *Uneven expertise:* Ask co-learners to be responsible for topics that
> are new to them.
>
> *Uneven participation and cohesion:* Ask co-learners what they want to
> do to motivate the group rather than imposing your own ideas.
>
> *Experts/facilitators that kill the conversation:* In the charter or
> other documentation, explicitly state that the purpose of the
> discussion is to further the conversation, and encourage experts to
> allow others to explore their own thinking by asking probing (not
> leading) questions.
>
> *Ambiguous goals:* Encourage the group to document their mission and
> what they will do as a team. This can change over time, but it is best
> to start out with a clear purpose.

### Conclusion

Make mistakes. Correct course. Invite new perspectives. Create a
structure that everyone can work with. Change it when it breaks. Most of
all, have fun!

# Case Study: Collaborative Explorations


Part I (Peter).
===============

Collaborative Exploration invites participants to shape their own
directions of inquiry and develop their skills as investigators and
teachers (in the broadest sense of the word). The basic mode of a
Collaborative Exploration centers on interactions over a delimited
period of time in small groups. Engagement takes place either online,
for instance via Google+, or face-to-face. The aim is to create an
experience of re-engagement with oneself as an avid learner and
inquirer. This section combines practical information about how to run
Collaborative Explorations as well as ideas and questions about how to
make sense of what happens in them. A companion entry conveys one
participant’s experience with several Collaborative Explorations
(hereafter, “CE”).

Overview and contrast to cMOOCs
-

The tangible goal of any CE is to develop contributions to the topic
defined by the “case”, which is written by the host or originator of the
CE in advance, and which is intended to be broad and thought-provoking
(some examples are given below). We aim for a parallel experiential
goal, which is that we hope participants will be impressed at how much
can be learned with a small commitment of time using this structure. The
standard model for an online CE is to have four sessions spaced one week
apart, in which the same small group interacts in real time via the
internet, for an hour per session. Participants are asked to spend at
least 90 minutes between sessions on self-directed inquiry into the
case, and to share their inquiries-in-progress with their small group
and a wider community. Reflection typically involves shifts in
participants’ definition of what they want to find out and how. Any
participants wondering how to define a meaningful and useful line of
inquiry are encouraged to review the scenario for the CE, any associated
materials, posts from other participants, and think about what they
would like to learn more about or dig deeper into. Everyone is left, in
the end, to judge for themselves whether what interests them is
meaningful and useful. During the live sessions, participants can expect
to do a lot of listening, starting off in the first session with
autobiographical stories that make it easier to trust and take risks
with whoever has joined that CE, and a lot of writing to gather their
thoughts, sometimes privately, sometimes shared. There is no assumption
that participants will pursue the case beyond the limited duration of
the CE. This said, the tools and processes that the CE employs for
purposes of inquiry, dialogue, reflection, and collaboration are
designed to be readily learned by participants, and to translate well
into other settings – for instance, where they can be used to support
the inquiries of others. In short, online CEs are moderate-sized open
online collaborative learning. It remains to be seen whether the CE
“movement” will attract enough participants to scale up to multiple
learning communities around any given scenario, each hosted by a
different person and running independently. A MOOC (massive open online
course) seeks to get masses of people registered, knowing that a tiny
fraction will complete it, while CE best practices focus on establishing
effective learning in small online communities, and then potentially
scale up from there by multiplying out. CEs aim to address the needs of
online learners who want to:

-   dig deeper, make “thicker” connections with other learners
-   connect topics with their own interests
-   participate for short periods of time
-   learn without needing credits or badges

Currently, even the most high-profile MOOCs do not appear to be
conducive to deep or thick inquiry. For example, while link-sharing is
typical in “connectivist” or “cMOOCs”, annotation and discussion of the
contents is less common. By contrast, CEs are structured to elicit
participants’ thoughtful reflections and syntheses. The use of the
internet for CEs, in contrast, is guided by two principles of online
education (Taylor 2007).

-   Use computers first and foremost to teach or learn things that are
    difficult to teach or learn with pedagogical approaches that are not
    based on computers
-   Model computer use, at least initially, on known best practices for
    teaching/learning without computers.

Thus, CEs bring in participants from a distance, make rapid connections
with informants or discussants outside the course, and contribute to
evolving guides to materials and resources. At the same time,
participants benefit from the support of instructors/facilitators and
peers who they can trust, and integrate what they learn with their own
personal, pedagogical, and professional development.

Example scenarios or “cases”
-

### Connectivist MOOCs: Learning and collaboration, possibilities and limitations

The core faculty member of a graduate program at a public urban
university wants help as they decide how to contribute to efforts at the
university program to promote open digital education. It is clear that
the emphasis will not be on xMOOCs, i.e., those designed for
transmission of established knowledge, but on cMOOCs. In other words,
the plan is to emphasize connectivist learning and community development
emerges around, but may extend well beyond, the materials provided by
the MOOC hosts (Morrison 2013; Taylor 2013). What is not yet clear about
is just how learning works in cMOOCs. What are the possibilities and
limitations of this educational strategy? How do they bear on themes
like creativity, community, collaboration, and openness? The program is
especially interested in anticipating any undesirable consequences…

### Science and policy that would improve responses to extreme climatic events

Recent and historical climate-related events shed light on the social
impact of emergency plans, investment in and maintenance of
infrastructure, as well as investment in reconstruction. Policy makers,
from the local level up, can learn from the experiences of others and
prepare for future crises. The question for this case is how to get
political authorities and political groups—which might be anywhere from
the town level to the international, from the elected to the
voluntary—interested in learning about how best to respond to extreme
climatic events. Changes might take place at the level of policy,
budget, organization, and so on. It should even be possible to engage
people who do not buy into the idea of human-induced climate
change—after all, whatever the cause, extreme climatic events have to be
dealt with….

The structure
-

Independent of the topic, we’ve found the following common structure
useful for our online CEs. *Before the first live session*: Participants
review the scenario, the expectations and mechanics, join a
special-purpose Google+ community and get set up technically for the
hangouts.

**Session 1**: *Participants getting to know each other*. After
freewriting to clarify thoughts and hopes, followed by a quick check-in,
participants take 5 minutes each to tell the story of how they came to
be a person who would be interested to participate in a Collaborative
Exploration on the scenario. Other participants note connections with
the speaker and possible ways to extend their interests, sharing these
using an online form.

*Between-session work*: Spend at least 90 minutes on inquiries related
to the case, posting about this to google+ community for the CE, and
reviewing the posts of others.

**Session 2**: *Clarify thinking and inquiries*. Freewriting on one’s
thoughts about the case, followed by a check-in, then turn-taking
“dialogue process” to clarify what participants are thinking about their
inquiries into the case. Session finishes with gathering and sharing
thoughts using an online form.

*Between-session work*: Spend at least 90 minutes (a) on inquiries
related to the case and (b) preparing a work-in-progress presentation.

**Session 3**: *Work-in-progress presentations*. 5 minutes for each
participant, with “plus-delta” feedback given by everyone on each
presentation.

*Between-session work*: Digest the feedback on one’s presentation and
revise it into a self-standing product (i.e., one understandable without
spoken narration).

**Session 4**: *Taking Stock*. Use same format as for session 2 to
explore participants’ thinking about (a) how the Collaborative
Exploration contributed to the topic (the tangible goal) and to the
experiential goal, as well as (b) how to extend what has emerged during
the CE.

*After session 4 (optional)*: Participants share on a public Google+
community not only the products they have prepared, but also reflections
on the Collaborative Exploration process.

How to make sense of what happens in CEs
-

engagement with oneself as an avid learner and inquirer in CEs is made
possible by the combination of:

-   Processes and tools used for inquiry, dialogue, reflection, and
    collaboration;
-   Connections made among the diverse participants who bring to bear
    diverse interests, skills, knowledge, experience, and aspirations;
    and
-   Contributions from the participants to the topics laid out in
    scenarios.

The hope is that through experiencing a engagement with learning,
participants will subsequently transfer experience with this triad into
their own inquiries and teaching-learning interactions, the ways that
they support inquiries of others; other practices of critical
intellectual exchange and cooperation; and that they will be more
prepared to challenge the barriers to learning that are often associated
with expertise, location, time, gender, race, class, or age.

Acknowledgements
-

The comments of Jeremy Szteiter and the contributions of the
participants of the 2013 Collaborative Explorations have helped in the
preparation of this article.

Part II (Teryl).
================

As a May graduate of the Master’s program in Critical and Creative
Thinking (CCT) at UMass Boston, I owe my gratitude to Professors Peter
Taylor and Jeremy Szteiter for inviting me to informally continue my
education less than a month later. It is a tribute to them that I would
then take four consecutive CEs without stopping. They can best share how
to run a CE, but as a “student,” it is how to creatively take a CE that
inspires what I’d like to share.

#### June 2013 CE: Scaffolding Creative Learning

I was grateful participants took the time to post links and ideas to
support my inquiries, yet something else intrigued me about the
potential of Collaborative Exploration. Luanne Witkowski, an artist and
one of the CCT instructors, took our ideas and made a diagram
incorporating our scaffolding concepts together; she changed her own
original drawing to include all of ours. I wanted to pay forward and
back my learning too, so I combined the ideas of all the participants,
adapted and taught a lesson outside the CE and then shared the results.
From this jumping into someone else’s scaffolding, I went into even more
experimental learning in the next CE.

#### July 2013 CE: Design in Critical Thinking

In a second CE, I took the title literally and developed a design IN
critical thinking. To try out my triangle tangent thinking model, during
a lesson on leadership in church, I suddenly stopped teaching a
classroom of older professional adults halfway in and asked them to
participate in “design as you go” curriculum—by taking over the class.
Since I wanted to be fair, along with my lesson outline I had already
given them a supposed “icebreaker” activity that they could teach from,
although they also had the option of my continued teaching. Results? My
triangle drawing works as a lesson plan; the class took the tangent, but
surprisingly, I wasn’t just relegated to moderator, it became a true
co-facilitation,a model of change at the midpoint for both the
individual and community in the choices and direction.

#### September 2013 CE: Everyone Can Think Creatively

This CE had to be commended for its participants humoring my project and
allowing the exploration of testing a CE itself. Was it possible to be a
Creative Failure in a Creativity CE? To evaluate “Creative Failure in a
Creativity CE,” I used a simple test. If creative success (unknowingly
given by my CE community) was a product both “novel AND useful,” any
post without a comment was a failure (“not useful”) to my readers. Any
post that a reader commented was similar to something else already done
was “useful,” but not novel. Failure had me posting again. Did I mention
what nice people these were when they didn’t know what I was doing? It
would have been easy for them to ignore my continued posting, yet the
community of a CE cannot be praised enough. They were supportive of me
and finding academic colleagues who have a sense of humor is mercifully
not novel, but extremely useful in this experience.

#### October 2013 CE: Stories to Scaffold Creative Learning

In this CE I gave myself the challenge of indirect teaching. Could I be
a story “shower”, not teller? I took concepts important to me about
teaching with story, yet also tried to leave space for others’
interpretations. Ironically, in some ways creative failure
continued—again I was not as helpful as I had wished. This CE also had a
twist—no hero stories allowed, so my creative and personal stories had
to be ambiguous or use other connecting structures based on the
participants’ preferences. It was interesting which stories worked
best—fiction worked more with humor, real experience worked if I shared
about someone other than myself and other kinds worked with
visuals.Collaborative Explorations provide a safe space for the joint
learning and teaching to occur. The diversity blends well into a
community that is curious, courageous and creative. Although I have my
M.A. as the first completely online CCT student, I found almost a
face-to-face learning “feel” in their deeply connected CE community as
well. It does require time, openness and commitment to each other during
the intense focus together on a topic. Yet seeing where the
participant-directed ‘design as you go’ curriculum ends up is worth
investing in and sharing with others. After all, there are many other
ways still out there to try out CEs.

#### Postscript

I also ran a CE for the Susquehanna Conference of the UMC for 10 days,
working with a group of professionals exploring a call into ordained
ministry. Going in cold, I had to work harder to do community
building without the Google hangout meetings and recommend their
inclusion to increase the comfort level and participation of the group
members.

Resources


Further examples of CE scenarios can be viewed at

<http://cct.wikispaces.com/CEt>.

Recommended readings below convey some of the sources for the CE
processes.  Ideas about possible extensions of CEs can be viewed in the
full prospectus at

<http://cct.wikispaces.com/CEp>.

References
-

1.  Morrison, D. (2013). “[A tale of two MOOCs @ Coursera: Divided by
    pedagogy](http://bit.ly/164uqkJ)”.

2.  Taylor, P. J. (2007) “Guidelines for ensuring that educational
    technologies are used only when there is significant pedagogical
    benefit,” International Journal of Arts and Sciences, 2 (1): 26-29,
    2007 (adapted from <http://bit.ly/etguide>).

3.  Taylor, P. J. (2013). “[Supporting change in creative
    learning](http://wp.me/p1gwfa-vv)”.

Recommended Reading
-

1.  Paley, V. G. (1997). The Girl with the Brown Crayon. Cambridge, MA,
    Harvard University Press.

2.  Paley, V.G. (2010). The Boy on the Beach: Building Community by
    Play. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

3.  Taylor, P. J. and J. Szteiter (2012). Taking Yourself Seriously:
    Processes of Research and Engagement Arlington, MA, The Pumping
    Station.

4.  White, M. (2011). Narrative Practice: Continuing the Conversation.
    New York, Norton.


# Cooperation


Facilitation is a process of helping groups work cooperatively and
effectively. Facilitation can be particularly helpful for individuals
who, based on a certain level of insecurity or inexperience, tend to
lurk rather than participate.  At the same time, it in peeragogy, a
facilitator isn’t necessarily an “authority”: rather, facilitation work
is done in service to the group and the group dialogue and process.  For
example, a facilitator may simply “hold space” for the group, by setting
up a meeting or a regular series of discussions.

 

Co-facilitating in peer-to-peer learning
-

Co-facilitation can be found in collaborations between two or
more people who need each other to complete a task, for example, learn
about a given subject, author a technical report, solve a problem, or
conduct research Dee Fink writes that “in this process, there has to be
some kind of change in the learner. No change, no learning”
<span>[</span>1<span>]</span>. Significant learning requires that there
be some kind of lasting change that is important in terms of the
learner’s life; in peeragogy, one way to measure the effectiveness of
co-facilitation is to look for a change in the peer group.

Co-facilitation roles can be found in groups/teams like basketball,
health, Alcoholics Anonymous, spiritual groups, etc. For example,
self-help groups are composed of people who gather to share common
problems and experiences associated with a particular problem,
condition, illness, or personal circumstance.  There are some further
commonalities across different settings.  Commenting on the work of Carl
Rogers:

> **Godfrey Barrett-Lennard**: The educational situation which most
> effectively promotes significant learning is one in which (1) threat
> to the self of the learner is reduced a minimum, and (2)
> differentiated perception of the field of experience is facilitated.
> <span>[</span>2<span>]</span>

Part of the facilitator’s role is to create a safe place for learning to
take place; but they should also challenge the participants.

> **John Heron**: Too much hierarchical control, and participants become
> passive and dependent or hostile and resistant. They wane in
> self-direction, which is the core of all learning. Too
> much cooperative guidance may degenerate into a subtle kind of
> nurturing oppression, and may deny the group the benefits of totally
> autonomous learning. Too much autonomy for participants and
> laissez-faire on your part, and they may wallow in ignorance,
> misconception, and chaos. <span>[</span>3<span>]</span>

Co-facilitating discussion forums


If peers are preparing a forum discussion, here are some ideas from
“[The Community Tool
Box](http://ctb.ku.edu/en/tablecontents/section_1180.aspx)”, that can be
helpful as guidelines:

-   Explain the importance of collaborative group work and make it a
    requirement.
-   Establish how you will communicate in the forum.
-   Be aware of mutual blind spots in facilitating and observing others.
-   Watch out for different rhythms of intervention.

Co-facilitating wiki workflows


A good place to begin for any group of co-facilitators working with a
wiki are Wikipedia’s famous “5 Pillars.”

-   Wikipedia is an encyclopedia.
-   Wikipedia writes articles from a neutral point-of-view.
-   Wikipedia is free content that anyone can edit, use, modify, and
    distribute.
-   Editors should interact with each other in a respectful and civil
    manner.
-   Wikipedia does not have firm rules.

Co-facilitating live sessions
--

Learning experiences in live sessions are described in the article
[Learning Re-imagined: Participatory, Peer, Global,
Online](http://dmlcentral.net/blog/howard-rheingold/learning-reimagined-participatory-peer-global-online)
by Howard Rheingold, and many of these points are revisited in the
handbook section on [real-time
tools](http://peeragogy.org/real-time-meetings/).  But we want to
emphasize one point here:

> **Howard Rheingold**: Remember you came together with your peers to
> accomplish something, not to discuss an agenda or play with
> online tools; keep everything as easily accessible as possible to
> ensure you realize your goals.

References
-

1.  Fink, L. D (2003). *Creating significant learning experiences: An
    integrated approach to designing college courses*. John Wiley &
    Sons.

2.  Barrett-Lennard, G. T. (1998). *Carl Rogers’ Helping System: Journey
    & Substance*. Sage.

3.  Heron, J. (1999). *The complete facilitator’s handbook*. London:
    Kogan Page.

 

# The Workscape


Cultivating a results-oriented peer-learning program in a corporate
learning ecosystem involves a few tweaks of the approach and tools we
discussed in relation to more open, diverse networks.

The Workscape, a platform for learning
--

Formal learning takes place in classrooms; informal learning happens in
*workscapes.* A workscape is a learning ecology. As the environment of
learning, a workscape includes the workplace. In fact, a workscape has
no boundaries. No two workscapes are alike. Your workscape may include
being coached on giving effective presentations, calling the help desk
for an explanation, and researching an industry on the Net. My workscape
could include participating in a community of field technicians, looking
things up on a search engine, and living in France for three months.
Developing a platform to support informal learning is analogous to
landscaping a garden. A major component of informal learning is natural
learning, the notion of treating people as organisms in nature. The
people are free-range learners. Our role is to protect their
environment, provide nutrients for growth, and let nature take its
course. A landscape designer’s goal is to conceptualize a harmonious,
unified, pleasing garden that makes the most of the site at hand. A
workscape designer’s goal is to create a learning environment that
increases the organization’s longevity and health and the individual’s
happiness and well-being. Gardeners don’t control plants; managers don’t
control people. Gardeners and managers have influence but not absolute
authority. They can’t makea plant fit into the landscape or a person fit
into a team. In an ideal Workscape, workers can easily find the people
and information they need, learning is fluid and new ideas flow freely,
corporate citizens live and work by the organization’s values, people
know the best way to get things done, workers spend more time creating
value than handling exceptions, and everyone finds their work
challenging and fulfilling.

The technical infrastructure of the Workscape


When an organization is improving its Workscape, looking at consumer
applications is a good way to think about what’s required. Ask net-savvy
younger workers how they would like to learn new skills, and they bring
up the features they enjoy in other services:

-   Personalize my experience and make recommendations, like Amazon.
-   Make it easy for me to connect with friends, like Facebook.
-   Keep me in touch with colleagues and associates in other companies,
    as on LinkedIn.
-   Persistent reputations, as at eBay, so you can trust who you’re
    collaborating with.
-   Multiple access options, like a bank that offers access by ATM, the
    Web, phone, or human tellers.
-   Don’t overload me. Let me learn from YouTube, an FAQ, or linking to
    an expert.
-   Show me what’s hot, like Reddit, Digg, MetaFilter, or Fark do.
-   Give me single sign-on, like using my Facebook profile to access
    multiple applications.
-   Let me choose and subscribe to streams of information I’m interested
    in, like BoingBoing, LifeHacker or Huffpost.
-   Provide a single, simple, all-in-one interface, like that provided
    by Google for search.
-   Help me learn from a community of kindred spirits, like SlashDot,
    Reddit, and MetaFilter.
-   Give me a way to voice my opinions and show my personality, as on my
    blog.
-   Show me what others are interested in, as with social bookmarks like
    Diigo and Delicious.
-   Make it easy to share photos and video, as on Flickr and YouTube.
-   Leverage “the wisdom of crowds,” as when I pose a question to my
    followers on Twitter or Facebook.
-   Enable users to rate content, like “Favoriting” an item on Facebook
    or +!ing is on Google or YouTube.

Some of those consumer applications are simple to replicate in-house.
Others are not. You can’t afford to replicate Facebook or Google behind
your firewall. That said, there are lots of applications you can
implement at reasonable cost. Be skeptical if your collaborative
infrastructure that doesn’t include these minimal functions:

**Profiles** - for locating and contacting people with the right skills
and background. Profile should contain photo, position, location, email
address, expertise (tagged so it’s searchable). IBM’s Blue Pages
profiles include how to reach you (noting whether you’re online now),
reporting chain (boss, boss’s boss, etc.), link to your blog and
bookmarks, people in your network, links to documents you frequently
share, members of your network.

**Activity stream** - for monitoring the organization pulse in real
time, sharing what you’re doing, being referred to useful information,
asking for help, accelerating the flow of news and information, and
keeping up with change

**Wikis** - for writing collaboratively, eliminating multiple versions
of documents, keeping information out in the open, eliminating
unnecessary email, and sharing responsibility for updates and error
correction

**Virtual meetings** - to make it easy to meet online. Minimum feature
set: shared screen, shared white board, text chat, video of
participants. Bonus features: persistent meeting room (your office
online), avatars.

**Blogs** - for narrating your work, maintaining your digital
reputation, recording accomplishments, documenting expert knowledge,
showing people what you’re up to so they can help out

**Bookmarks** - to facilitate searching for links to information,
discover what sources other people are following, locate experts

**Mobile access** - Half of America’s workforce sometimes works away
from the office. Smart phones are surpassing PCs for connecting to
networks for access and participation. Phones post most Tweets than
computers. Google designs its apps for mobile before porting them to
PCs.

**Social network** - for online conversation, connecting with people,
and all of the above functions.

Conclusion
-

Learning used to focus on what was in an individual’s head. The
individual took the test, got the degree, or earned the certificate. The
new learning focuses on what it takes to do the job right. The workplace
is an open-book exam. What worker doesn’t have a cell phone and an
Internet connection? Using personal information pipelines to get help
from colleagues and the Internet to access the world’s information is
encouraged. Besides, it’s probably the team that must perform, not a
single individual.  Thirty years ago, three-quarters of what a worker
need to do the job was stored in her head; now it’s less than 10%.  

# Participation


> Methods of managing projects, including learning projects, range from
> more formal and structured to casual and unstructured. As a
> facilitator, you’ll see your peeragogy community constantly adjust, as
> it seeks an equilibrium between order and chaos, ideally allowing
> everyone to be involved at their own pace without losing focus, and in
> such a manner that the collective can deliver.

For teachers reading this, and wondering how to use peeragogy to improve
participation in their classrooms, it’s really quite simple: reframe the
educational vision using peeragogical eyes.  Recast the classroom as a
community of people who learn together, the teacher as facilitator, and
the curriculum as a starting point that can be used to organize and
trigger community engagement.  However, just because it’s simple doesn’t
mean it’s easy!  Whatever your day job may be, consider: how well do the
various groups you participate in work together – even when the members
ostensibly share a common purpose?  Sometimes things tick along nicely,
and, presumably, sometimes it’s excruciating.  What’s your role in all
of this?  How do *you* participate?

Guidelines for participation
-

-   Accept that some people want to watch what is going on before
    jumping in. This doesn’t mean you have to keep them hanging around
    forever. After a while, you may un-enroll people who don’t add any
    value to the community. In our Peeragogy project, we’ve asked people
    to explicitly re-enroll several times. Most do renew; some leave.
-   Accept that people may only contribute a little: if this
    contribution is good it will add value to the whole.
-   Understand that you can not impose strict deadlines on volunteers;
    adjust targets accordingly.
-   Let your work be “open” in the sense described in
    Wikipedia’s [Neutral Point of
    View](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view) policy.
-   Give roles to participants and define some “energy centers” who will
    take the lead on specific items in the project.
-   Organize regular face-to-face or online meetings to talk about
    progress and what’s needed in upcoming days/weeks.
-   Ask participants to be clear about when they will be ready to
    deliver their contributions.
-   Have clear deadlines, but allow contributions that come in after the
    deadline – in general, be flexible.
-   Add a newcomer section on your online platform to help new arrivals
    get started. Seasoned participants are often eager to serve as
    mentors.

When we think about project management in an organization, we often
relate to well-established tools and processes. For example, we can use
the [Project Management Body of
Knowledge](http://www.pmi.org/PMBOK-Guide-and-Standards.aspx) (PMBOK) as
a standard. For the Project Management Institute (PMI) and many workers,
these standards are seen as the key to project success. In classical
project management, tasks and deadlines are clearly defined. We will,
for example, use [Program Evaluation and Review
Technic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PERT) (PERT) to analyze and
represent tasks. We often represent the project schedule using a [Gantt
chart](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gantt_chart). Those are just two of
the project management tools that illustrate how “mainstream” project
management rests firmly on an engineering background. In these very
structured projects, each actor is expected to work exactly as planned
and to deliver his part of the work on time; every individual delay can
potentially lead to a collective delay.

Peeragogy projects may be, naturally, a bit different from other
settings, although we can potentially reuse both formal and informal
methods of organization.  For example, unlike a typical wiki – or
classroom – peeragogy projects often expect to break the [90/9/1
rule](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1%25_rule_%28Internet_culture%29). Keep
in mind that some participants may not contribute all the time – but one
really good idea can be a major contribution.  See the anti-pattern
“[Misunderstanding
Power](http://peeragogy.org/practice/antipatterns/misunderstanding-power/)”
for some further reflections on these matters.

How are we doing? If we take our Google+ Community have contributed to
the handbook as the basic population, then as of January 2014, over 4%
have contributed – pretty good.  However, we have yet to reach a
contribution profile like 70/20/10. It’s important to remember that –
especially in a volunteer organization – no one can “make”’ other people
participate, and that all the lists of things to do are for nought if no
one steps in to do the work.  For this reason, if anything is going to
happen, what’s needed are *realistic* estimates of available work
effort. Finally, in closing this section, we want to emphasize that
measures of participation offer only a very rough proxy for measures of
learning, although the two are clearly related.

# Designs for co-working


> Interpersonal exchange and collaboration to develop and pursue common
> goals goes further than “learning” or “working” in their mainstream
> definitions.  This article will look at examples drawn from Linux,
> Wikipedia, and my own work on PlanetMath, with a few surprises along
> the way, leading us to new ways of thinking about how to do co-design
> when build systems for peer learning and peer production.

Co-working as the flip side of convening
-

> **Linus Torvalds**: The first mistake is thinking that you can throw
> things out there and ask people to help. That’s not how it works. You
> make it public, and then you assume that you’ll have to do all the
> work, and ask people to come up with suggestions of what you should
> do, not what they should do. Maybe they’ll start helping eventually,
> but you should start off with the assumption that you’re going to be
> the one maintaining it and ready to do all the work. The other
> thing–and it’s kind of related–that people seem to get wrong is to
> think that the code they write is what matters. No, even if you wrote
> 100% of the code, and even if you are the best programmer in the world
> and will never need any help with the project at all, the thing that
> really matters is the users of the code. The code itself is
> unimportant; the project is only as useful as people actually find it.

In fact, we can think of contributors as a special class of “user” with
a real time investment in the way the project works. We typically cannot
“Tom Sawyer” ourselves into leisure or ease just because we manage to
work collaboratively, or just because we have found people with some
common interests.  And yet, in the right setting, many people do want to
contribute! For example, on “Wikipedia, the encyclopedia anyone can
edit” (as of 2011) [as many
as](http://%20http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/wikipedias_goal_1_billion_monthly_visitors_by_2015.php) 80,000
visitors make 5 or more edits per month. This is interesting to compare
with the [empirical
fact](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia) that (as of
2006) “over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users… *24
people*… and in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done
73.4% of all the edits.”  Similar numbers apply to other peer production
communities.

A little theory


In many natural systems, things are not distributed equally, and it is
not atypical for e.g. 20% of the population to control 80% of the wealth
(or, as we saw, for 2% of the users to do nearly 80% of the edits).
Many, many systems work like this, so maybe there’s a good reason for
it. Let’s think about it in terms of “coordination” as understood by the
late Elinor Ostrom. She talked about “local solutions for local
problems”. By definition, such geographically-based coordination
requires close proximity. What does “close” mean? If we think about
homogeneous space, it just means that we draw a circle (or sphere)
around where we are, and the radius of this circle (resp. sphere) is
small.

An interesting [mathematical
fact](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-sphere#Volume_and_surface_area) is
that as the dimension grows, the volume of the sphere gets “thinner”, so
the radius must increase to capture the same *d*-dimensional volume when
*d* grows!  In other words, the more different factors impact on a given
issue, the less likely there are to be small scale, self-contained,
“local problems” or “local solutions” in the first place.

As a network or service provider grows  (like a
[MOOC](http://peeragogy.org/organize/connectivism-in-practice-how-to-organize-a-mooc/)
as opposed to a [Collaborative
Exploration](http://peeragogy.org/case-study-collaborative-explorations/),
for example), they typically build many weak ties, with a few strong
ties that hold it all together.  Google is happy to serve everyone’s web
requests – but they can’t have just anyone walking in off the street and
connecting devices their network in Mountain View.

By the way, the 2006 article about Wikipedia quoted above was written by
Aaron Swartz (“over 50% of all the edits are done by… 24 people”, etc.),
who achieved considerable
[notoriety](http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/07/swartz-arrest/) for
downloading lots and lots of academic papers with a device plugged into
MIT’s network. His suicide while under federal prosecution for this
activity caused considerable shock, grief, and dismay among online
activists. One thing we could potentially take away from the experience
is that there is a tremendous difference between a solo effort and the
distributed peer-to-peer infrastructures like the ones that underly the
PirateBay, which, despite raids, fines, jail sentences, nation-wide
bans, and server downtime, has proved decidedly hard to extinguish.
According to a recent press release: “If they cut off one head, two more
shall take its place.”

Co-working: what is an institution?
--

As idealists, we would love to be able to create systems that are both
powerful and humane.  Some may reflect with a type of sentimental
fondness on completely mythical economic systems in which a “dedicated
individual could rise to the top through dint of effort.”  But
well-articulated systems like this *do* exist: natural languages, for
example, are so expressive and adaptive that most sentences have never
been said before.  A well-articulated system lends itself to “local
solutions to local problems” – but in the linguistics case, this is only
because all words are not created equal.

> **Dr Seuss**: My brothers read a little bit. Little words like ‘If’
> and ‘It.’ My father can read big words, too, Like CONSTANTINOPLE and
> TIMBUKTU.

We could go on here to talk about Coase’s theory of the firm, and
Benkler’s theory of “[Coase’s
Penguin](http://www.yale.edu/yalelj/112/BenklerWEB.pdf)”. We might
continue [quoting](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/perfectinstitutions)
from Aaron Swartz. But we will not get so deeply into that here: you can
explore it on your own!  For now, it is enough to say that an
institution is a bit like a language.  This will help us a lot in the
next section.

Designing a platform for peer learning**
-

> [PlanetMath](planetmath.org) *is a virtual community which aims to
> help make mathematical knowledge more accessible.*

In my PhD thesis <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>, I talk about my work to
turn this long-running website, which since 2001 had focused on building
a mathematics encyclopedia, into a peer produced peer learning
environment. We wanted to retain all of the old activities related to
authoring, reviewing, and discussing encyclopedia articles, but we would
also add a bunch of new features having to do with mathmatical problem
solving, an activity that is suitable for mathematical beginners.

My first translation of this idea into a basic interaction design was as
follows.  People can continue to add articles to PlanetMath’s
encyclopedia: they can connect one article to another (A$\rightarrow$A)
either by making one article the “parent” of another, or, more
typically, via an inline link. Like in the old system, users can discuss
any object (X$\rightarrow$T), but now there is more structure:
*problems* can be connected to articles (A$\rightarrow$P) and
*solutions* can be connected to problems (P$\rightarrow$S).  Instead of
explicitly modeling “goals,” I decided that problems and articles could
be organized into “collections,” the same way that videos are organized
into playlists on YouTube, and that the user would get encouraging
directed feedback as they work their way through the problems in a given
collection.  I described a few other types of objects and interactions,
like questions and answers, groups, and the ability to change the “type”
of certain contributed objects. 

The next step was to do a complete overhaul of PlanetMath’s software
system, to build something that could actually *do* all of that.  After
deploying the realized system and doing some studies with PlanetMath
users, I realized the design summarized above was not complete.  Note
that this is very much along the lines of what Linus Torvalds said
above: I did the design, and me and a small group of collaborators with
their own vested interests built the system, then we put it out there to
get more ideas from users.

The main thing that was missing from the earlier design was the idea of
a *project*.  From interviewing users, it became clear to me that it
would be helpful to think of every object as being part of at least one
project: everything should have someone looking after it!   Importantly,
getting back to the very beginning of this article, each project can
define its own purpose for existing.  Here’s how I put it in my thesis:

> *Actions and artifacts are embedded within projects, which can be
> modeled in terms of informal user experience and formal system
> features. Project updates can be modeled with a language of
> fundamental actions. Projects themselves model their outcomes, and are
> made “viable” by features that connect to the motivations and
> ambitions of potential participants.*

The key point is that the evolving design describes a sort “grammar” for
the kinds of things that can be done on PlanetMath.  In the updated
design, projects are something like paragraphs that combine simple
sentences.  The language can be extended further, and I hope that will
happen in further study.  In particular, we need to understand more
about how the “sub-language” of project updates works (compare
the [Roadmap](http://peeragogy.org/practice/roadmap/) pattern described
in this handbook).

The discussion continues: Reliving the history of mathematics as a peeragogical game?
-

These notes have shown one approach to the design of spaces for learning
and knowledge building. Although the article has focused on mathematics
learning, similar reflections would apply to designing other sorts of
spaces for learning or working, for instance, to the continued
development of the Peeragogy project itself! Perhaps it can contribute
to the development of a new kind of institution.

> **Doug Breitbart**: It occurred to me that you could add a learning
> dimension to the site that sets up the history of math as a series of
> problems, proofs and theorems that, although already solved, could be
> re-cast as if not yet solved, and framed as current challenges which
> visitors could take on (clearly with links to the actual solutions,
> and deconstruction of how they were arrived at, when the visitor
> decides to throw in the towel).

References
-

1.  Corneli, J. (2014).  [Peer Produced Peer Learning: A Mathematics
    Case Study](http://metameso.org/~joe/thesis-outline.html).  Ph. D.
    thesis.   The Open University.


# A co-working story


The board of a housing association needs to set a strategy that takes
account of major changes in legislation, the UK benefits system and the
availability of long term construction loans. Julian, eager to make use
of his new-found peeragogical insights suggests an approach where
individuals research specific factors and the team work together to draw
out themes and strategic options. As a start he proposes that each board
member researches an area of specific knowledge or interest.

Jim, the Chairman, identifies questions he wants to ask the Chairs of
other Housing Associations. Pamela (a lawyer) agrees to do an analysis
of the relevant legislation. Clare, the CEO, plans out a series of
meetings with the local councils in the boroughs of interest to
understand their reactions to the changes from central government.
Jenny, the operations director, starts modelling the impact on occupancy
from new benefits rules. Colin, the development director, re-purposes
existing work on options for development sites to reflect different
housing mixes on each site. Malcolm, the finance director, prepares a
briefing on the new treasury landscape and the changing positions of
major lenders.

Each member of the board documents their research in a private wiki.
Julian facilitates some synchronous and asynchronous discussion to draw
out themes in each area and map across the areas of interest. Malcolm,
the FD, adapts his financial models to take different options as
parameters. Clare refines the themes into a set of strategic options for
the association, with associated financial modelling provided by
Malcolm. Individual board members explore the options asynchronously
before convening for an all-day meeting to confirm the strategy.

# Assessment


> This article is about both assessment in peer learning and an exercise
> in assessment, as we put our strategy for assessment into practice by
> evaluating the [Peeragogy Handbook](http://peeragogy.org) itself.

Adapting strategies for learning assessment to the peer-learning context


In “[Effective Grading: A Tool for Learning and
Assessment](http://books.google.com/books?id=EJxy06yX_NoC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_atb#v=onepage&q&f=false),”
Barbara E. Walvoord and Virginia Johnson Anderson have outlined an
approach to grading. They address three questions:

1.  Who needs to know, and why?

2.  Which data are collected?

3.  How does the assessment body analyze data and present findings?

The authors suggest that institutions, departments, and assessment
committees should begin with these simple questions and work from them
towards anything more complex. These simple questions provide a way to
understand - and assess - any strategy for assessment! For example,
consider “formative assessment” (in other words, keeping track of how
things are going).  In this context, the answers to the questions above
would be:

1.  Teachers need to know about the way students are thinking about
    their work, so they can deliver better teaching.

2.  Teachers gather a lot of these details on learning activities by
    “listening over the shoulders” of students.

3.  Teachers apply analysis techniques that come from their training or
    experience – and they do not necessarily present their assessments
    to students directly, but rather, feed it back in the form of
    improved teaching.

This is very much a “teacher knows best” model! In order to do something
like formative assessment among peers, we would have to make quite a few
adjustments.

1.  At least some of the project participants would have to know how
    other participants are thinking about their work as well as
    analyzing their own progress. We are then able to “deliver better
    teaching” and work together to problem-solve when difficulties
    arise.

2.  It may be most convenient for each participant to take on a share of
    the work (e.g. by maintaining a “learning journal” which might be
    shared with other participants). This imposes a certain overhead,
    but as we remarked elsewhere, “meta-learning is a font of
    knowledge!” Outside of persistent self-reflection, details about
    others’ learning can sometimes be abstracted from their
    contributions to the project (“learning analytics” is a whole topic
    unto itself).

3.  If a participant in a “learning project” is bored, frustrated,
    feeling closed-minded, or for whatever other reason “not learning,”
    then there is definitely a question. But for whom? For the person
    who isn’t learning? For the collective as a whole? We may not have
    to ponder this conundrum for long: if we go back to the idea that
    “learning is adaptation,” someone who is not learning in a given
    context will likely leave and find another context where they can
    learn more.

This is but one example of an assessment strategy: in addition to
“formative assessment”, “diagnostic” and “summative” strategies are also
quite popular in mainstream education. The main purpose of this section
has been to show that when the familiar roles from formal education
devolve “to the people,” the way assessment looks can change a lot. In
the following section, we offer and begin to implement an assessment
strategy for evaluating the peeragogy project as a whole.

Case study in peeragogical evaluation: the Peeragogy project itself
-

We can evaluate this project partly in terms of its main “deliverable,”
the Peeragogy Handbook (which you are now reading). In particular, we
can ask: Is this handbook useful for its intended audience? If so, in
what ways?  If not, how can we adapt? The “intended audience” could
potentially include anyone who is participating in a peer learning
project, or who is thinking about starting one. We can also evaluate the
learning experience that the co-creators of this handbook have had. Has
working on this book been a useful experience for those involved? These
are two very different questions, with two different targets for
analysis – though the book’s co-creators are also part of the “intended
audience”. Indeed, we might start by asking “how has working on this
book been useful for us?”

### A methodological interlude: “Follow the money”

The metrics for learning in corporations are business metrics based on
financial data. Managers want to know: Has the learning experience
enhanced the workers’ productivity?  When people ask about the ROI of
informal learning, ask them how they measure the ROI of formal learning.
Test scores, grades, self-evaluations, attendance, and certifications
prove nothing. The ROI of any form of learning is the value of changes
in behavior divided by the cost of inducing the change. Like the tree
falling over in the forest with no one to hear it, if there’s no change
in behavior over the long haul, no learning took place. ROI is in the
mind of the beholder, in this case, the sponsor of the learning who is
going to decide whether or not to continue investing. Because the figure
involves judgment, it’s never going to be accurate to the first decimal
place. Fortunately, it doesn’t have to be. Ballpark numbers are solid
enough for making decisions.  

The process begins before the investment is made. What degree of change
will the sponsor accept as worthy of reinvestment? How are we going to
measure that? What’s an adequate level of change? What’s so low we’ll
have to adopt a different approach? How much of the change can we
attribute to learning? You need to gain agreement on these things
beforehand. Monday morning quarterbacking is not credible. It’s
counterproductive to assess learning immediately after it occurs. You
can see if people are engaged or if they’re complaining about getting
lost, but you cannot assess what sticks until the forgetting curve has
ravaged the learners’ memories for a few months. Interest also doesn’t
guarantee results in learning, though it helps.  Without reinforcement,
people forget most of what they learn in short order. It’s beguiling to
try to correlate the impact of learning with existing financial metrics
like increased revenues or better customer service scores. Done on its
own, this approach rarely works because learning is but one of many
factors that influence results, even in the business world. Was today’s
success due to learning or the ad campaign or weak competition or the
sales contest or something else? The best way to assess how people learn
is to ask them. How did you figure out how to do this? Who did you learn
this from? How did that change your behavior? How can we make it better?
How will you?  Self-evaluation through reflective practice can build
both metacognition and self-efficacy in individuals and groups. Too time
consuming? Not if you interview a representative sample. For example,
interviewing less than 100 people out of 2000 yields an answer within
10% nineteen times out of twenty, a higher confidence level than most
estimates in business. Interviewing 150 people will give you the right
estimate 99% of the time.

### Roadmaps in Peer Learning

We have identified several basic and more elaborated patterns that
describe “the Peeragogy effect”.  These have shaped the way we think
about things since.  We think the central pattern is the Roadmap, which
can apply at the individual level, as a personal learning plan, or at a
project level.  As we’ve indicated, sometimes people simply plan to see
what happens: alternative versions of the Roadmap might be a compass, or
even the ocean chart from the *Hunting of the Snark*.  The roadmap may
just be a North Star, or it may include detailed reasons “why,” further
exposition about the goal, indicators of progress, a section for future
work, and so forth.  Our initial roadmap for the project was the
preliminaly outline of the handbook; as the handbook approached
completion at the “2.0” level, we spun off additional goals into a new
roadmap for a Peeragogy Accelerator. Additional patterns flesh out the
project’s properties in an open “agora” of possibilities.  Unlike the
ocean, our map retains traces of where we’ve been, and what we’ve
learned. In an effort to document these “paths in the grass,” we
prepared a short survey for Peeragogy project participants.

We asked people how they had participated (e.g., by signing up for
access to the Social Media Classroom and mailing list, joining the
Google+ Community, authoring articles, etc.) and what goals or interests
motivated their participation.  We asked them to describe the Peeragogy
project itself in terms of its aims and to evaluate its progress over
the first year of its existence. As another measure of “investment” in
the project, we asked, with no strings attached, whether the respondent
would consider donating to the Peeragogy project. This survey was
circulated to 223 members of the Peeragogy Google+ community, as well as
to the currently active members of the Peeragogy mailing list.  The
responses outlining the project’s purpose ranged from the general: “How
to make sense of learning in our complex times?” – to much more
specific:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 1**: Push education further, providing a
> toolbox and techniques to self-learners. In the peeragogy.org
> introduction page we assume that self-learners are self-motivated,
> that may be right but the Handbook can also help them to stay
> motivated, to motivate others and to face obstacles that may erode
> motivation.

Considering motivation as a key factor, it is interesting to observe how
various understandings of the project’s aims and its flaws intersected
with personal motivations. For example, one respondent (who had only
participated by joining the Google+ community) was:
“<span>[</span>Seeking<span>]</span>
<span>[</span>i<span>]</span>nformation on how to create and engage
communities of interest with a shared aim of learning.” More active
participants justified their participation in terms of what they get out
of taking an active role, for instance:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 2**: “Contributing to the project allows
> me to co-learn, share and co-write ideas with a colourful mix of great
> minds. Those ideas can be related to many fields, from communication,
> to technology, to psychology, to sociology, and more.”

The most active participants justified their participation in terms of
beliefs or a sense of mission:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 3**: “Currently we are witnessing many
> efforts to incorporate technology as an important tool for the
> learning process. However, most of the initiatives are reduced to the
> technical aspect (apps, tools, social networks) without any
> theoretical or epistemological framework. Peeragogy is rooted in many
> theories of cooperation and leads to a deeper level of understanding
> about the role of technology in the learning process. I am convinced
> of the social nature of learning, so I participate in the project to
> learn and find new strategies to learn better with my students.”

Or again:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 4**: “I wanted to understand how peer
> production really works. Could we create a well-articulated system
> that helps people interested in peer production get their own goals
> accomplished, and that itself grows and learns? Peer production seems
> linked to learning and sharing - so I wanted to understand how that
> works.”

They also expressed criticism of the project, implying that they may
feel rather powerless to make the changes that would correct course:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 5**: “Sometimes I wonder whether the
> project is not too much ‘by education specialists for education
> specialists.’ I have the feeling peer learning is happening anyway,
> and that teens are often amazingly good at it. Do they need ‘learning
> experts’ or ‘books by learning experts’ at all? Maybe they are the
> experts. Or at least, quite a few of them are.”

Another respondent was more blunt:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 6**: “What problems do you feel we are
> aiming to solve in the Peeragogy project? We seem to not be sure. How
> much progress did we make in the first year? Some… got stuck in
> theory.”

But, again, it is not entirely clear how the project provides clear
pathways for contributors to turn their frustrations into changed
behavior or results. Additionally we need to be entirely clear that we
are indeed paving new ground with our work. If there are proven peer
learning methods out there we have not examined and included in our
efforts, we need to find and address them. Peeragogy is not about
reinventing the wheel. It is also not entirely clear whether excited new
peers will find pathways to turn their excitement into shared products
or process. For example, one respondent (who had only joined the Google+
community) had not yet introduced current, fascinating projects
publicly:

> **Anonymous Survey Respondent 7**: “I joined the Google+ community
> because I am interested in developing peer to peer environments for my
> students to learn in. We are moving towards a community-based,
> place-based program where we partner with community orgs like our
> history museum for microhistory work, our local watershed community
> and farmer’s markets for local environmental and food issues, etc. I
> would love for those local efforts working with adult mentors to
> combine with a peer network of other HS students in some kind of cMOOC
> or social media network.”

Responses such as this highlight our need to make ourselves available to
hear about exciting new projects from interested peers, simultaneously
giving them easier avenues to share. Our work on developing a peeragogy
accelerator in the next section is an attempt to address this situation.

### Summary

We can reflect back on how this feedback bears on the main sections of
this book with a few more selected quotes.  These motivate further
refinement to our strategies for working on this project, and help build
a constructively-critical jumping off point for future projects that put
peeragogy into action.

  *How can we build strong collaboration?*

> “A team is not a group of people who work together.  A team is not a
> group of people who work together.  A team is a group of people who
> trust each other.”

  *How can we build a more practical focus?*

> “The insight that the project will thrive if people are working hard
> on their individual problems and sharing feedback on the process seems
> like the key thing going forward.  This feels valuable and important.”

  *How to connect with newcomers and oldcomers?*

> “I just came on board a month ago.  I am designing a self-organizing
> learning environment (SOLE) or PLE/PLN that I hope will help enable
> communities of life long learners to practice digital literacies.”

  *How can we be effective and relevant?*

> “I am game to also explore ways attach peeragogy to spaces where
> funding can flow based on real need in communities.”

Conclusion
-

We can estimate individual learning by examining the real problems
solved by the individual.  It makes sense to assess the way groups solve
problems in a similar way.  Solving real problems often happens very
slowly, with lots of practice along the way.  We’ve learned a lot about
peer learning in this project, and the assessment above gives a serious
look at what we’ve accomplished, and at how much is left.

# Researching peeragogy


> This is an unfinished essay from 2001, found nearly a decade and a
> half later in a box of odds and ends. The essay foreshadows our
> ongoing research on peer produced peer learning, and also helps to
> highlight some of the difficulties associated with this enterprise.

#### RESEARCH SKILL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

**THE POINT.** This is an effort at understanding how research skills in
the mathematical sciences [but it could be any topic] can be acquired by
students.

**WHO WE ARE.** We are students at a state-funded liberal arts college
based in Sarasota, Florida. Our school is called New College. The
emphasis of the program at New College is self-directed learning.

**SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING.** Since people have free will and learn from
experience, self-directed learning could be said to take place wherever
people engage in any activity. However, this view is unfounded, and the
implication is false. Unstructured learning is more accurately
undirected. If learning is structured, say by a teacher, this does not
imply that it is self-directed, even given the free will of the learner
to participate. The choice to participate in learning is not the same as
directing the learning. Structure can impose the direction on a
(passive) learner. This does not mean that the presence of a teacher or
a system to learn implies that the student’s learning is not
self-directed. The criterion we are looking for is that the student have
an active, ongoing and purposive role in deciding the structure of
his/her/its [e.g. in the case of computer programs] learning
environment. A teacher must be informed by and responsive to the
student’s feedback, or the learning the student does under that
teacher’s instruction is not self-directed.

**INTEGRATION OF RESEARCH AND EDUCATION.** In deciding upon a course of
study, it behooves the student, as he/she/it examines a potential
activity, to consider questions such as these, with the utmost care:

-   What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?
-   Is there sufficient access to resources?
-   How well-conceived and organized is the proposed activity?
-   To what extent does the proposed activity suggest and explore
    creative and original concepts?
-   To what extent will it enhance possibilities for future work?
-   What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?
-   What is the product?

If these questions are addressed well, the student will enter upon a
focused program and will have already at the beginning devised a
coherent plan for its satisfactory completion. Furthermore, the product
is likely to be a net benefit to society. The idea of traditional
education is that it is the student, with an increased knowledge and
skill base, who constitutes the product. His/her/its knowledge and
skills (upon exiting the educational program) are valued by society, and
he/she/it is willing to put forth during the program a commensurate
amount of blood, sweat, and tears (not to mention tuition and time) to
extract the valuable knowledge and skills. In scientific fields, one of
these skills is supposed to be the ability to do research. The idea that
“the best proof of someone’s research ability is the research they have
done” has played a significant role in the way scientific education, and
the scientific enterprise, has been run in recent years. Research
experience at the undergraduate level is one of the top criteria
considered by graduate programs in science when they decide which
candidates to admit. It is not without reason, then, that national
programs for undergraduate researchers (most notably, the National
Science Foundation’s Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
summer programs) are highly competitive, taking only the best qualified
applicants nationwide. Many technical and land-grant universities have
internally- or industry-funded Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Programs (UROP) which offer financial awards to undergraduate students,
which enable them to collaborate with faculty on specialized research
projects in their joint field of interest, or to do original work on
their won. These programs make it possible for students to make research
a part of their background. In particular, such programs give students a
chance to see what it is like to work on open problems (usually the
problems devised by the program administrator or principal investigator;
occasionally on questions proposed by the student researchers
themselves). It goes without saying that such experiences are typically
only part of the curriculum. The NSF’s vision of integrating research
and education is to have individuals concurrently assume
responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students, where all
engage in joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of
discovery and enrich research through the diversity of learning
perspectives. The benefits of such a system are manifold. It is however
very difficult to implement in most educational contexts. A place like
New College, where the culture already is disposed towards student
self-direction, may be unique in its ability to foster an undergraduate
scientific curriculum based primarily on research. The questions listed
at the beginning of this section are the questions a research must
answer when initiating a research program for undergraduates. (They were
lifted from the NSF’s summary of how they review REU proposals.) By
pointing out here that the same questions are the natural questions for
a student to ask when considering how to invest his/her/its time and
energy, we mean to point to the unique possibility afforded the
self-directed learner, namely: he/she/it can act as a researcher, an
educator, and a student concurrently, and, to a degree that is possible
for very few, harmoniously.

**RESEARCH AS A WAY OF LIFE (ADDITIONAL REVIEW CRITERIA SPECIFIC TO
REU).** There are other criteria considered by the NSF, for example, the
qualifications of the person who proposes the research project. This is
*prima facie* difficult for undergraduates to fulfil satisfactorily.
Further criteria include:

-   The appropriateness and value of the educational experience for the
    student participants, particularly the appropriateness of the
    research project(s) for undergraduate involvement and the nature of
    student participation in these activities.
-   The quality of the research environment, including the record of the
    mentor(s) with undergraduate research participation, the facilities,
    and the professional development opportunities.
-   Appropriateness of the student recruitment and selection plan,
    including plans for involving students from underrepresented groups
    and from institutions with limited research opportunities.
-   Quality of plans for student preparation and follow-through designed
    to promote continuation of student interest and involvement in
    research.
-   For REU sites, effectiveness of institutional commitment and of
    plans for managing the project and evaluating outcomes.

#### Some afterthoughts, with the benefit of hindsight (2015)

The idea that an undergraduate student could run an REU program is
perhaps not entirely ridiculous, but it is still extremely unlikely to
work – as the essay points out. What is possible is for a student or
group of students to set up a website and collaborate informally online.
This is what Aaron Krowne did in around 2001, with PlanetMath.org. I
joined a few years later, as a graduate student in mathematics.
PlanetMath was a little bit like an always-on version of the project
outlined in the essay above. The main emphasis was on building a
mathematics encyclopedia, but some contributors were doing original
research and collaborating with each other. The site administrators and
assorted devotees were also doing a lot of meta-level thinking about how
the project could improve. In 2005 or thereabouts, I started a wiki
called AsteroidMeta to help organize those discussions. By this time, I
was no longer in the mathematics graduate programme: I had more or less
stopped going to classes a year earlier. My interests had more to do
with how computers could change the way people do mathematics than in
doing mathematics the way it had always been done. Myself and a few
other PlanetMath contributors published research papers on this theme in
a symposium on Free Culture and the Digital Library that Aaron helped
organize at Emory, where he was then Head of Digital Library Research.
Working on informal collaborations like this, and doing related open
source software development, I built a CV that helped me get into
another postgrad program in 2010. This time, in the United Kingdom,
where I was able to largely set my own research agenda from the start. I
focused on rebuilding the PlanetMath website (as described in the
*Handbook* chapter on “New Designs for Co-Working and Co-Learning”).
Presenting some of this work at Wikimania 2010, I met Charlie Danoff,
and when we later met online at P2PU, we decided to sit in on each
others first round of courses. As the term progressed, we
collaboratively developed a critique of the way things worked at P2PU
and suggested some principles that would guide improvement. We called
this “paragogy.” When Howard Rheingold learned about this work from
Charlie, who was taking one of his online classes at RheingoldU, he
suggested the more accessible name “peeragogy.” To our pleasant surprise
Howard then drew on his network of friends and fans to kick off the
Peeragogy project. Naturally, I joined, and was able to draw on what we
learned in my thesis. Unlike the previous time around, I also had a lot
of formal support from my supervisors, as well as a lot of
self-organized support from others, and I completed the program
successfully. In doing so, I began to accrue the credentials that would
be necessary for organizing a formally-funded research project like the
one outlined in the essay above. Doing this in the undergraduate
research setting would, of course, require interested undergraduates. At
the moment, I’m employed as a computer science researcher, exploring the
development of peer learning and peer production with the computational
“its” mentioned in the essay. The Peeragogy project continues to be a
great resource for collaborative research on research and collaboration.

# Technologies, Services, and Platforms



**It is tempting to bring a list of technologies out as a glorious
cookbook.** We need a 1/2 cup of group writing tools, 2 tsp. of social
network elements, a thick slice of social bookmarking, and some sugar,
then put it in the oven for 1 hour for 350 degrees.

We have created a broad features/functions list for Handbook readers to
reflect upon and consider. The joy of this list is that you can consider
alternatives for the way you communicate and work while you are planning
the project, or can add in new elements to solve communications gaps or
create new tools.

However, too many tools spoil the broth. In the writing of this
Handbook, we found that out firsthand. We spent a lot of marvelous
energy exploring different tools to collaborate, curate information, do
research, tag resources, and adjudicate among all of our points of view.
In looking at groups working with the various MOOCs, as another example,
different groups of students often camp in different social media
technologies to work.

In large courses, students often have to be pushed into various social
media tools to “co-create” with great protest and lots of inertia. And
finally, co-learning groups often come from very different backgrounds,
ages, and stages of life, with very different tools embedded in their
current lives. Do we have time for three more tools in our busy days? Do
more tools help – or do they interfere with our work?

In this section, we’ll share with you a few issues:

-   What technologies are most useful in peer learning? What do we use
    them for? What features or functions help our co-learning process?
-   How do we decide (a) as a group and (b) for the group on what tools
    we can use? Do we decide upfront, or grow as we go?
-   How do we coach and scaffold each other on use of tools?
-   How much do the tool choices impact the actual outcome of our
    learning project?
-   What are the different roles that co-learners can take in
    co-teaching and co-coaching the technology affordances/assumptions
    in the project to make others’ lives easier?

Keep in mind – your needs for tools, plus how the way the group uses
them, will change as the co-learning project moves along.  Technologies
themselves tend to change rapidly.  Are you willing to change tools
during the project as your needs and users change, or do you plan to use
a given tool set from the beginning to the end of your project?

Features and Considerations


We will begin below with a discussions of “features” and initial
considerations, and then move to a broader “Choose Your Own
Adventure”-style matrix of features leading to a wide variety of
collaboration-based technology tools online.

### Technologies and Features

As we will share in the extensive list below, there are abundant tools
now available – both for free and for pay – to bring great features to
our co-learning endeavors. It is tempting to grab a group of fancy tools
and bring the group into a fairly complex tool environment to find the
perfect combination of resources. The challenge: adult learners seek
both comfort and context in our lives <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>,
<span>[</span>2<span>]</span>. In choosing tool “brands”, we can ignore
the features themselves and what we need as parts of the puzzle for
learning. We also can have anxiety about our self-beliefs around
computers and technology, which in turn can limit our abilities
<span>[</span>3<span>]</span>.

Before we get to brands and choices, it helps to ask a few questions
about the learning goals and environments:

-   What do we need as features, and at what stage of the learning
    process?
-   What are we already comfortable with, individually and as a group?
-   Do we want to stay with comfortable existing tools, or do we want to
    stretch, or both?
-   What types of learners do we have in this group? Technologically
    advanced? Comfortable with basics?
-   Do we want to invest the time to bring the whole group up to speed
    on tools? Do all the group members agree on this? Do we want to risk
    alienating members by making them invest time in new resources?
-   We know that our use will migrate and adapt. Do we want to plan for
    adaptation? Observe it? Learn from it? Make that change intentional
    as we go?

Researchers over the years have heavily examined these questions of
human, technology, and task fit in many arenas. [Human-Computer
Interaction](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human-Computer_Interaction)
researchers have looked at “fit” and “adaptive behavior,” as well as how
the tools can affect how the problem is presented by Te’eni
<span>[</span>4<span>]</span>. Creativity support tools
<span>[</span>5<span>]</span> have a whole line of design research, as
has the field of [Computer-Supported Collaborative Work Systems
(CSCW)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer-supported_cooperative_work).
For co-learners and designers interested in the abundance in this space,
we’ve added some additional links below. We here will make this a bit
easier. For your co-learning environment, you may want to do one or two
exercises in your decision planning:

What *features do you need*?  Do you need collaboration? Graphic models?
Places to work at the same time (synchronous)? Between meetings
(asynchronous)? What are the group members *already using* as their
personal learning platforms? It also makes sense to do an inventory
about what the group already has as their learning platforms. I’m doing
that with another learning group right now. People are much more
comfortable – as we also have found in our co-creation of this Handbook
– creating and co-learning in tools with which they already are
comfortable. Members can be co-teachers to each other – as we have have
– in new platforms. What *type of tools*, based on the features that we
need, shall we start out with?  Resnick *at al.*
<span>[</span>6<span>]</span> looked at tools having:

-   Low thresholds (easy to get people started)
-   Wide walls (able to bring in lots of different situations and uses)
    and
-   High ceilings (able to do complex tasks as the users and uses adapt
    and grow).

What are important features needed for co-creation and *working
together*? In other pages above, we talk abundantly about roles and
co-learning challenges. These issues also are not new; Dourish &
Bellottii <span>[</span>7<span>]</span> for example, shared
long-standing issues in computer-supportive collaborative work online
about how we are aware of the information from others, passive vs.
active generation of information about collaborators, etc. These
challenges used to be “solved” by software designers in individual
tools. Now that tools are open, abundant, and diverse, groups embrace
these same challenges when choosing between online resources for
co-learning.

### Useful Uses and fancy Features of Technological Tools

From here, we will help you think about what might be possible, linking
to features and solution ideas.

We start with ways to ask the key questions: What do you want to do and
why? We will start with features organized around several different
axes:

1.  Time/Place

2.  Stages of Activities and Tasks

3.  Skill Building/Bloom’s Taxonomy

4.  Use Cases, and

5.  Learning Functions.

Each will link to pages that will prompt you with features,
functionality, and technology tool ideas.

### Time/Place

We can further break down tools into whether they create or distribute,
or whether we can work simultaneously (synchronous) or at our own times
(ascynchronous). To make elements of time and place more visual, Baecker
<span>[</span>8<span>]</span> created a CSCW Matrix, bringing together
time and place functions and needs. Some tools are synchronous, such as
Google+ Hangouts, Blackboard Collaborate, and Adobe Connect, while
others let us work asynchronously, such as wikis and forums.  Google
Docs can work be used both ways.  We seem to be considering here mostly
tools good for group work, but not for solo, while many others are much
easier solo or in smaller groups.

Some tools are synchronous, such as Google+ Hangouts, Blackboard
Collaborate, and Adobe Connect, while others let us work asynchronously,
such as wikis, forums, and Google Docs. We seem to be considering here
mostly tools good for group work, but not for solo, while many others
are much easier solo or in smaller groups.

### Stages of Activities and Tasks

Ben Shneiderman <span>[</span>5<span>]</span> has simplified the
abundant models in this area (e.g., Couger and Cave) with a clear model
of 4 general activities and 8 tasks in creation for individuals, which
we can lean on as another framework for co-creation in co-learning.

Tools and functions won’t be clear cut between areas. For example, some
tools are more focused on being generative, or for creating content.
Wikis, Etherpad, Google docs, and others usually have a commenting/talk
page element, yet generating content is the primary goal and
discursive/consultative functions are in service of that. Some tools are
discursive, or focused on working together for the creative element of
“relating” above – Blackboard Collaborate, the social media class room
forums, etc.

### Skill Building (Cognitive, a la Bloom’s Taxonomy, see below)

Given that we are exploring learning, we can look to Bloom’s Taxonomy
(revised, see <span>[</span>9<span>]</span>) for guidance as to how we
can look at knowledge support. Starting at the bottom, we have:

-   Remembering, as a base;
-   Understanding,
-   Applying,
-   Analyzing,
-   Evaluating, and then, at the top,
-   Creating.

We could put “search” in the Remembering category above. Others contest
that Search, done well, embraces most of the Bloom’s elements above.
Samantha Penney has created a [Bloom’s Digital Taxonomy
Pyramid](http://www.usi.edu/distance/bdt.htm) infographic, describing
tools for learning, which you may want to check out.

### Use Cases (I want to….)

Technologies can be outlined according to the need they serve or use
case they fulfill. Examples: If we need to ‘curate’, Pearl Trees is an
option. To ‘publish’ or ‘create’, we can look to a wiki or wordpress.
Other choices might be great in order to ‘collaborate’, etc.

One challenge is that tools are not that simple. As we look more closely
at the technologies today, we need to reach more broadly to add multiple
tags to them. For example Twitter can be used for “Convening a group,”
for “micro-blogging,” for “research,” etc.

-   Collaborate with a Group
-   Create Community
-   Curate Information
-   Research
-   Publish Information
-   Create Learning Activities
-   Make Something

These plans get more complex, as you are making a group of decisions
about tool functionality in order to choose what combination works for
use cases. It may be most useful to use a concept map (a tech tool) to
think about the needs and combinations that you would bring together to
achieve each Use Case or Learning Module.

### Technology Features/Functions

We have not made this easy! There are lots of moving elements and
options here, none of them right for everything, and some of them
fabulous for specific functions and needs. Some have the low thresholds
but may not be broad in scope. Some are broad for many uses; others are
specific task-oriented tools. That is some of the charm and frustration.

Weaving all of the above together, we have brought together a shared
taxonomy for us to discuss and think about co-learning technology
features and functions, which we present as an appendix below. This
connects various technology features within an expanded version of Ben
Shneiderman’s creativity support tools framework. We’ve created this
linked toolset with multiple tags, hopefully making it easier for you to
evaluate which tool suits best the necessities of the group. Please
consider this a starting point for your own connected exploration.

Appendix: Features and Functions
--

Weaving all of these frameworks together, we have brought together a
shared taxonomy for us to discuss and think about co-learning technology
features and functions. We have connected various technology features
with an expanded version of Ben Shneiderman’s creativity support tools
framework for the linked resource guide.  For convenience and to help
keep it up to date, we’re publishing this resource [on Google
Docs](http://goo.gl/H02fMA).   We present an overview below.

### References

1.  Schein, E. H. (1997). *Organizational learning as cognitive
    re-definition: Coercive persuasion revisited*. Cambridge, MA:
    Society for Organizational Learning.

2.  Schein, E. H. (2004). *Organizational culture and leadership.* San
    Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

3.  Compeau, D.R., & Higgins, C.A. (1995, June). Computer Self-Efficacy:
    Development of a Measure and Initial Test. *MIS Quarterly, 19*, (2),
    189-211.

4.  Te’eni, D. (2006). Designs that fit: An overview of fit
    conceptualizations in HCI. In *Human-Computer Interaction and
    Management Information Systems: Foundations*, edited by P. Zhang and
    D. Galletta, pp. 205-221, Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.

5.  Shneiderman, B. (2002). Creativity support tools. *Commun. ACM* 45,
    10 (October 2002), 116-120.

6.  Resnick, M, Myers, B, Nakakoji, K, Shneiderman, B, Pausch, R,
    Selker, T. & Eisenberg, M (2005). [Design principles for tools to
    support creative thinking](http://repository.cmu.edu/isr/816).
    *Institute for Software Research.* Paper 816.

7.  Dourish, P. & Bellotti, V. (1992). Awareness and coordination in
    shared workspaces. In *Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on
    Computer-supported cooperative work* (CSCW ’92). ACM, New York, NY,
    USA, 107-114.

8.  Baecker, R.,
    [Grudin](http://www.interaction-design.org/references/authors/jonathan_grudin.html),
    J.,
    [Buxton](http://www.interaction-design.org/references/authors/william_buxton.html),
    W., &
    [Greenberg](http://www.interaction-design.org/references/authors/saul_greenberg.html),
    & (eds.) (1995): *Readings in Human-Computer Interaction: Toward the
    Year 2000.* New York, NY: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers

9.  Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). (2001). *A taxonomy for
    learning, teaching and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of
    educational objectives: Complete edition*. New York, NY: Longman.


# Forums


> Forums are web-based communication media that enable groups of people
> to conduct organized multimedia discussions about multiple topics over
> a period of time. Selecting the right kind of platform for forum
> conversations is important, as is know-how about facilitating ongoing
> conversations online. Forums can be a powerful co-learning tool for
> people who may have never met face-to-face and could be located in
> different time zones, but who share an interest in co-learning.
> Asynchronous media such as forums (or simple email distribution lists
> or [Google Docs](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VVFbqHhkb-k)) can be
> an important part of a co-learning toolkit that also include
> synchronous media from face-to-face meetups to [Google+
> Hangouts](http://www.google.com/+/learnmore/hangouts/) or webinars via
> [Blackboard
> Collaborate](http://www.blackboard.com/Platforms/Collaborate/Products/Blackboard-Collaborate.aspx),
> [Adobe Connect](http://www.adobe.com/products/adobeconnect.html), or
> the open source webconferencing tool, [Big Blue
> Button](http://www.bigbluebutton.org/)).

### What is a forum and why should a group use it?

A forum, also known as a message board,
[bbs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulletin_board_system), threaded
discussion, or conferencing system, affords asynchronous, many-to-many,
multimedia discussions for large groups of people over a period of time.
That means that people can read and write their parts of the discussion
on their own schedule, that everyone in a group can communicate with
everyone else, and that graphics, sounds, and videos can accompany text.
The best forums index discussion threads by topic, title, tag,
date,and/or author and also keep track of which threads and entries
(also known as posts) each logged-in participant has already read,
making it possible to click on a “show me all the new posts and threads”
link each time a participant logs in. This particular form of
conversational medium meets the need for organizing conversations after
they reach a certain level of complexity. For example, if twenty people
want to discuss five subjects over ten days, and each person makes one
comment on each subject every day, that makes for one thousand messages
in each participant’s mailbox. On email lists, when the conversation
drifts from the original topic, the subject line usually does not
change, so it makes it difficult to find particular discussions later.

Forums make possible a new kind of group discussion that unfolds over
days, weeks, and months, in a variety of media. While blogs are
primarily about individual voice, forms can be seen as the voice of a
group. The best forum threads are not serial collections of individual
essays, but constitute a kind of discourse where the discussion becomes
more than the sum of its individual posts. Each participant takes into
account what others have said, builds on previous posts, poses and
answers questions of others, summarize, distill, and concludes.

This short piece on [guidelines for discussion board
writing](http://www.lehigh.edu/~indiscus/doc_guidelines.html)is useful,
as is this short piece on [shaping a culture of
conversation](http://academiccommons.org/commons/essay/shaping-culture-conversation).
Lively forums with substantial conversation can glue together the
disparate parts of a peeragogy group – the sometimes geographically
dispersed participants, texts, synchronous chats, blogs, wikis and other
co-learning tools and elements. Forum conversations are an art in
themselves and forums for learning communities are a specific genre.
Reading the resources linked here – and communicating about them – can
help any peeragogy group get its forums off to a good start

### How to start fruitful forum discussions:

In most contexts, starting a forum with a topic thread for introductions
tends to foster the sense of community needed for valuable
conversations. [This short piece on how to host good conversations
online](http://www.rheingold.com/texts/artonlinehost.html)offers general
advice. In addition to introductions, it is often helpful to start a
topic thread about which new topic threads to create – when everybody
has the power to start a new thread and not everybody knows how forums
work, a confusing duplication of conversations can result, so it can be
most useful to make the selection of new topic threads a group exercise.
A topic thread to ask questions about how to use the forum can prevent a
proliferation of duplicate questions. It helps to begin a forum with a
few topic threads that invite participation in the context of the
group’s shared interest “Who is your favorite photographer” for a group
of photographers, for example, or “evolution of human intelligence” for
a group interested in evolution and/or human intelligence. Ask
questions, invite candidate responses to a challenge, make a provocative
statement and ask for reactions.

Whether or not you use a rubric for assessing individual participants’
forum posts, this guide to [how forum posts are
evaluated](http://www.wpi.edu/Academics/ATC/Collaboratory/Idea/boards.html)
by one professor can help convey the difference between a good and a
poor forum conversation:

*4 Points -*The posting(s) integrates multiple viewpoints and weaves
both class readings and other participants’ postings into their
discussion of the subject.

*3 Points -*The posting(s) builds upon the ideas of another participant
or two, and digs deeper into the question(s) posed by the instructor.

*2 Points -*A single posting that does not interact with or incorporate
the ideas of other participants’ comments.

*1 Point -*A simple “me too” comment that neither expands the
conversation nor demonstrates any degree of reflection by the student.

*0 Points -*No comment.

### Selecting a forum platform

-   You don’t want a forum for discussions among two or three people;
    you do want a forum for discussions among half a dozen or five
    thousand people.
-   You don’t want a forum for exchanges of short duration (an hour, a
    day or two) among any number of people; you do want a forum for
    ongoing conversations that can continue for months.
-   You don’t want a forum if blogs with comment threads will do – blogs
    with comments afford group discourse, but is not easily indexed and
    discourse gets complicated with more than a dozen or so bloggers and
    commenters.

If you do want to select a platform for forum discourse, you will want
to decide whether you have the technical expertise available to install
the software on your own server or whether you want to look for a hosted
solution. Cost is an issue.

Fortunately, an online forum maven by the name of [David
Wooley](http://thinkofit.com/whoweare.htm) has been keeping an
up-to-date list of available software and services for more than a
decade:

-   [Forum Software for the
    Web](http://thinkofit.com/webconf/forumsoft.htm)
-   [Forum and Message Board Hosting
    Services](http://thinkofit.com/webconf/hostsites.htm)

These [2003 suggestions on how to choose a
forum](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1D606u7SfVD3p7xH0lbf2mOO1hIdX97r7kVe753hSYeE/edit)
by Howard Rheingold can be helpful. If blogs with comments afford a kind
of networked individualistic discourse, and video conferencing emulates
face-to-face meeting, forums can be seen as a channel for expression of
the group voice. When people react to and build on each other’s
comments, they can learn to act as a collective intelligence as well as
a collection of individuals who are communicating in order to learn.

 

# Wiki


> In the context of P2P-learning, a wiki platform can be a useful and
> powerful collaboration tool. This section will help you understand
> what a wiki is and what it is not, why you should use it, how to
> choose a wiki engine and finally how you could use it in a P2P
> context. Some examples of P2P-learning projects run on wikis will help
> you see the potential of the tool.

What is a wiki?


For [Ward Cunningham](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ward_cunningham)
father of the wiki, “a wiki is a freely expandable collection of
interlinked Web ‘pages’, a hypertext system for storing and modifying
information - a database, where each page is easily editable by any user
with a forms-capable Web browser client” <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>.

According to Wikipedia : “a wiki is a website whose users can add,
modify, or delete its content via a web browser using a simplified
markup language or a rich-text editor” <span>[</span>2<span>]</span>.

You can watch this CommonCraft video [wiki in plain
english](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-dnL00TdmLY) to better
understand what a wiki is.

What differentiates the wiki from other co-editing tools?


The previous definitions show that a wiki is a “website,” in other words
it is composed of pages that are connected together by hyperlinks.In
additiont every authorized person (not all wikis are totally open like
Wikipedia) can edit the pages from a web browser, reducing time and
space constrains. In case one saves a mistake or for any other reason
would like to go back to a previous version, a feature called “history”
allows users to see previous versions and to roll back any of them. This
version history allows also to compare versions avoiding the cluttered
of the “commentaries rainbow” we are used too in popular Word
processors. For example if you work on a wiki page, and come back later
on, you will be able to catch up by comparing your last version with the
lastest version of someone else.

Tools like [Google
Docs](https://docs.google.com/) or [Etherpad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etherpad) are
design to enable co-editing on a single document. This can be seen as a
“wiki way” of working on a document as it is web based and includes
versioning. But it is not a wiki because a single document is not a
website. Those tools offer realtime collaboration which wikis do not and
are so far easier to use for beginners as they work
in [WYSIWYG](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WYSIWYG) mode, which many
wikis do not support.  However, the advanced features [wiki markup
language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki_syntax) make it a more
powerful tool. In summary, tools like Googles Docs or Etherpad are a
great way to quickly collaborate (synchronously, asynchronously, or a
mixture of both) on a single document for free, with a low barrier to
entry and no technical support. (Note that Etherpad does have a
“wiki-links” plugin that can allow it to be used in a more wiki-like
way; [Hackpad](https://hackpad.com/) is another real-time editing tool
that prominently features linking – and it claims to be “the best wiki
ever”.)

Using a real wiki engine is more interesting for bigger projects and
allows a huge number of users to collaborate on the same platform. A
wiki reduces the coordination complication as e-mails exchanges are no
more needed to coordinate a project. On the other hand it can help us
deal with complexity (<span>[</span>3<span>]</span>,
<span>[</span>4<span>]</span>) especially if you put basic simple rules
in place like the Wikipedia’s [neutral point of
view](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NPOV) to allow every participant to
share her or his ideas.

Going back to the continuum we talked about before, some tools like
Moodle, SharePoint, WordPress, Drupal or others have build in wiki
features. Those features can be good but will typically not be as good
for wiki-building purposes as a well-developed special-purpose wiki
engine. In other words, those tools main focus is not the wiki, which is
only a secondary feature. When you choose a real wiki engine
like [Mediawiki](http://www.mediawiki.org/), [Tiki](http://www.tiki.org/), [Foswiki](http://foswiki.org/),
etc., the wiki will be your platform, not a feature of it. For example
if you start a wiki activity in a Moodle course, this wiki will be only
visible to a specific group of students and searchable only to those
students. On the other hand if your learning platform is a wiki, the
whole platform will be searchable to all members regarding their
permissions. We are not saying here that a wiki is better than other
tools but if you need a wiki engine to address your needs you may
consider going with a strong wiki engine rather than a “micro-wiki”
engine embedded in an other tool.

Why use a wiki?


Those are the main reasons you should consider a wiki for your peer
learning projects :

-   To reduce coordination complication by having a central and always
    up to date place to store your content. You will reduce e-mail usage
    drasticly, and have access to your content from everywhere using any
    operating system.
-   To keep track of the evolution of your project and be able to view
    or roll back any previous version of a wiki page using the history
    feature.
-   To make links between wiki pages to connect ideas and people but
    also make links to external URL’s. This last possibility is very
    handy to cite your sources.
-   To deal with complexity. As a wiki allows anyone to contribute, if
    you set some easy rules like Wikipedia’s NPOV (Neutral Point of
    View), you will be able to catch more complexity as you will allow
    everyone to express his or her opinion. Wikis also integrate a forum
    or comment feature that will help you solve editing conflicts.
-   To deal with work in progress. A wiki is a great tool to capture an
    on going work.
-   To support transparency by letting every members of the community
    see what others are doing.
-   To support a network structure as a wiki is by essence an horizontal
    tool.

Using a hyperlinks you can…

> **Gérard Ayache**:  “…jump by a single click from a network node to
> the other, from a computer to an other, from one information to the
> other, from one univers to the other, from one brain to the other.” 
> (Translated from <span>[</span>5<span>]</span>.)

How to choose a wiki engine?
-

You will find more than a hundred different wiki engines.

The first main distinction is between open source ones that are free to
download and commercial ones you will have to pay for. You will find
powerful engines on both sides open source and commercial. Sometimes the
open source ones look less polished at first sight but are backed by a
strong community and offer a lot of customization possibilities. The
commercial are sold like a package, they are nicely presented but often
they offer less customization on the user side and additional feature or
custom made tools will cost you an extra fee.

The second distinction that we can make is between wiki farms and
self-hosted wikis. The [wiki
farm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki_hosting_service) is a hosting
service you can find for both open source or commercial wikis. The goal
of those farms is to simplify the hosting of individual wikis. If you
don’t want to choose a wiki farm hosting, you will have to host the wiki
on your own server. This will give you more latitude and data privacy
but will require more technical skills and cost you maintenance fees.

The [Wikimatrix](http://www.wikimatrix.org/) web site will help you
choose the best wiki for your needs. It allows you to compare the
features of more than a hundred wiki
engines. [Here](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?TopTenWikiEngines) is the top ten
list of the best wiki engines by Ward Cunningham.

How can a wiki be useful in a peeragogy project?


A wiki is a good tool collaborative projects and a specially suited for
work in progress as you can easily track changes using the history,
compare those version and if necessary roll back a previous versions. In
other words, nothing gets lost.

Here are some ideas about how to use a wiki in a peeragogy project :

-   **Use a wiki as your learning platform**. It can also
    support [Massive Open Online Courses
    (MOOCs)](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy/wiki/connectivism-practice-how-organize-a-mooc). A
    wiki will help you organize your [learning
    context](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy/wiki/organizing-a-learning-context).
    You can choose to give access to your wiki only to the project
    participants or open it to the public
    like [Wikipedia](http://www.wikipedia.org/). Using hyperlinking, you
    will operationalize the theory
    of [connectivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connectivism) by
    connecting nodes together. As a learning platform wikis are powerful
    because you can easily see what others are doing, share with them,
    get inspired, merge ideas or link to ideas. In other words, it
    creates emulation between learners. For additional ressources about
    wiki in education follow this
    Diigo [link](http://www.diigo.com/user/regisb/wiki%20education).
-   **Manage your peeragogy project**. A wiki is an excellent tool for
    project collaboration. Above all, the wiki can be a central place
    for peer learners to write or link to content. Even if you use
    several technologies to run your project as we did to write this
    handbook, at the end of the day, all the content can be centralized
    on a wiki using direct writing on wiki pages or hyperlinks. This way
    members can access the content from anywhere and from any device
    connected to the internet using any platform or application and they
    will always see the most recent version while being able to browse
    through the versions history to understand what has changed since
    their last visit.
-   **Publish your project**. As a wiki is a website you can easily use
    it to show your work to the world. Regarding web design, don’t
    forget that a wiki can look way better than a Wikipedia page if you
    customize it

Examples of peeragogy projects run on wikis
-

[Appropedia](http://www.appropedia.org/Welcome_to_Appropedia) is a wiki
site for collaborative solutions
in [sustainability](http://www.appropedia.org/Sustainability), [poverty](http://www.appropedia.org/Poverty) reduction
and [international
development](http://www.appropedia.org/International_development) through
the use of
sound [principles](http://www.appropedia.org/Principles) and [appropriate
technology](http://www.appropedia.org/Appropriate_technology) and the
sharing of wisdom and
[project](http://www.appropedia.org/Project) information. The site is
open to stakeholders to find, create and improve scalable and adaptable
solutions.

[Teahouse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Teahouse) is a
peeragogy project run on a wiki that gives newcomers a place to learn
about Wikipedia culture and get feedback from experienced Wikipedians.

What are the best practices when using a wiki?
-

-   **Cofacilitation** – help each other learn, help each other
    administer
-   **Self-election** – enable people to choose what they want to work
    on, at their own pace, in their own way
-   **Communication** – use comment threads and talk pages to discuss
    wiki changes
-   **Documenting changes** – most wikis enable editors to write very
    brief descriptions of their edits
-   **Rules** – keep rules at a minimum level to avoid chaos without
    constraining creativity
-   **Fun** – make it fun for people to contribute

References
-

1.  Leuf, Bo, et Ward, Cunningham. 2001. The Wiki way : quick
    collaboration on the Web. Boston: Addison-Wesley, xxiii, 435 p. p.14

2.  [Wiki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki) on Wikipedia

3.  Andrus, Calvin D. 2005. [Toward a complex adaptative intelligence
    community - The wiki and the blog](http://ssrn.com/abstract=755904).
    Studies in Intelligence. vol. 49, no 3. Online :

4.  Barondeau, Régis. 2010. [La gestion de projet croise le
    wiki](http://www.regisbarondeau.com/Chapitre+4%3A+Analyse+du+cas#Synth_se).
    École des Sciences de la Gestion, Université du Québec à Montréal,
    180 pp.

5.  Ayache, Gérard. 2008. Homo sapiens 2.0 : introduction à une histoire
    naturelle de l’hyperinformation. Paris: Milo, 284 p. p.179


# Real-time Meetings


> Web services that enable broadband-connected learners to communicate
> in real time via audio, video, slides, whiteboards, chat, and
> screen-sharing enable learning groups to add some of the audio-visual
> dimensions familiar from synchronous face-to-face communication to
> otherwise asynchronous platforms such as forums, blogs, and wikis.
> This article includes resources for finding and evaluating appropriate
> for-free or for-fee platforms, tips on participative activities for
> real-time meetings, and suggestions for blending real-time and
> asynchronous media.

Real-time meeting media
--

The *Peeragogy Handbook* was conceived and constructed by a group of
people on four continents who had not met and had not known about each
other before we began meeting online. The process involves asynchronous
media, including forums, wikis, social bookmarking groups, and
Wordpress, but it probably would never have cohered into a group capable
of collective action if it had not been for the real-time meetings where
we were able to see each other’s faces, hear each other’s voices, use a
whiteboard as an anonymous agenda-generator, exchange links in chat,
show each other examples through screen-sharing. Together, the
asynchronous and real-time media enabled us to begin to see ourselves as
an effective group. We used both real-time and asynchronous tools to
work out processes for creating, refining, and publishing the Handbook,
to divide labor, decide on platforms and processes, to collaboratively
compose and edit articles, and to design and add graphical and video
elements. In particular, we used the [Blackboard
Collaborate](http://www.blackboard.com/platforms/collaborate/overview.aspx)
platform, a web-service that enables up to 50 people at a time to meet
in a multimedia, recordable, meeting room for around \$500/year. We’ve
experimented with other paid platforms, such as [Adobe
Connect](http://success.adobe.com/en/na/sem/products/connect/1109_6011_connect_webinars.html)
(about the same price as Collaborate), and when we meet in groups of ten
or less, we often use the free and recordable [Google+
Hangout](http://www.google.com/+/learnmore/hangouts/) service. Smaller
groups also use [Skype](http://www.skype.com) or free telephone
conferencing services.  [Mumble](http://mumble.sourceforge.net/) is an
open source audio-only tool that is popular with gamers. We’re watching
the development of [Big Blue Button](http://www.bigbluebutton.org/), a
free and open-source real-time meeting platform, as it develops the full
suite of tools that are currently only available for a fee. Dozens of
other free, ad-supported and/or freemium webconferencing systems such as
[Big Marker](http://www.bigmarker.com/about) and
[Dim-Dim](http://www.dimdim.com) can be found in lists like [Howard
Rheingold’s](http://delicious.com/hrheingold/webconferencing) and [Robin
Good’s](http://www.mindmeister.com/12213323/best-online-collaboration-tools-2012-robin-good-s-collaborative-map)
(see links at the end of this chapter). Free phone conferencing services
provide another technological “lowest common denominator”: some provide
a few extras like downloadable recordings.

<img class="displayed" src="./images/elluminate.jpg" alt="Elluminate" style="width: 600px;"/>

Features of real-time meeting platforms


There are many free services for chat, screen-sharing, whiteboards, and
video conferencing, but combining all these components in separate panes
of the same screen (preferably) or as separate tabs of a browser can
have a powerful synchronizing and harmonizing effect on the group. The
features to look for in meeting platforms include:

**Audio and video**: Choose platforms that enable
voice-over-internet-protocol (VOIP) and easy ways for participants to
configure their microphones and speakers. Today’s webcams, together with
adequate lighting and a broadband connection, enable a number of people
to be visible at the same time. In Blackboard Collaborate, the person
who is speaking at a given moment is visible in the largest video pane,
while other participants are available in smaller video windows. Audio
and video convey much more of a human dimension than text communications
alone. A group of people who have seen and heard each other online are
able to work together via asynchronous media such as forums and wikis
more effectively. Online face-to-face meetings are often the best way
for a group to argue constructively and decide on critical issues.
Forums and email are comparatively bad choices for distributed
decison-making.

**Slide pushing:** The best platforms will convert .ppt or .pdf files
for sequential display. With the addition of text chat, annotations to
slides, and the ability to “raise your hand” or interrupt with your
voice, an online lecture can be a more multidimensional experience than
even a highly discursive in-person lecture.

**Text chat:** As a backchannel, a means of quickly exchanging links to
relevant resources, a channel for collaborative note-taking, a way of
communicating with the lecturer and with other participants, text chat
adds a particularly useful dimension to real-time peeragogical meetings
– especially when the division of labor is explicitly agreed upon in
advance. We’ve found that even in meetings that use the real-time
collaborative editor [Etherpad](http://etherpad.org) for collaborative
note taking, participants may gravitate toward the built-in chat box for
discussion.

**Screen sharing:** The ability of participants to show each other what
is on their screens becomes especially important in peer learning, where
we all have some things to show each other.

**Web tours:** An alternative to screen-sharing is the ability to
display the same web page(s) to all participants by entering URLs.

**Interactive whiteboards**: A shared space that enables participants to
enter text, drawings, shapes, colors, to move and resize media, and to
import graphic content – especially if it allows anonymous actions – can
foster the feeling of participating in a collective intelligence.
Collaborative anonymous mind-mapping of the discussion is one technique
to try with whiteboards. The whiteboard can also be used to generate an
emergent agenda for an “un-meeting”.

Configuring Google+ Hangout - a free alternative for up to 10 people
--

For up to 10 people, each equipped with a webcam, microphone, and
broadband connection, [Google+
Hangout](http://lifehacker.com/5842191/google%252B-hangouts-adds-screen-sharing-google-docs-collaboration-and-more)
can provide high-quality audio-video conferencing. By enabling the
text-chat feature and adding Google Docs (text documents, presentations,
or spreadsheets), screensharing, and SketchUp (whiteboard), it is
possible to emulate most of what the commercial services offer.  Adobe
Connect and Blackboard Collaborate currently have the user-interface
advantage of displaying chat, video, whiteboard/slides as resizable
panes on one screen; at present, the free Google services can provide a
powerful extension of the basic audio-video platform, but participants
have to shift between different tabs or windows in the browser. Note
that it is possible to [stream a Hangout and record it to
YouTube](http://www.google.com/+/learnmore/hangouts/onair.html), again
at no cost to the user.  We’ve used this tool extensively in the
Peeragogy project.

Suggestions for real-time meetings
-

In the nine online courses I have facilitated, the emphasis on
co-learning encouraged participants to suggest and shape active roles
during real-time meetings. By creating and taking on roles, and shifting
from role to role, participants engage in a kind of collective learning
about collective learning which can be as pleasurable as well as useful.
Typically we first brainstorm, then analyze, then organize and present
the knowledge that we discover, construct, and ultimately convey
together.

Roles for participants in real-time meetings
--

-   **Searchers:** search the web for references mentioned during the
    session and other resources relevant to the discussion, and publish
    the URLs in the text chat
-   **Contextualizers:** add two or three sentences of contextual
    description for each URL
-   **Summarizers:** note main points made through text chat.
-   **Lexicographers:** identify and collaboratively define words and
    phrases on a wiki page.
-   **Mappers:** keep track of top level and secondary level categories
    and help the group mindmapping exercise at the end of the session.
-   **Curators:** compile the summaries, links to the lexicon and
    mindmaps, contextualized resources, on a single wiki page.
-   **Emergent Agendas:** using the whiteboard for anonymous nomination
    and preference polling for agenda items, with voice, video, and
    text-chat channels for discussing nominations, a group can quickly
    set its own agenda for the real-time session.

The Paragogical Action Review
--

Charlie Danoff and Joe Corneli slightly modified the US Army’s “After
Action Review” into a technique for evaluating peer learning as it
happens.  The five steps in the “PAR” are:

1.  Review what was supposed to happen

2.  Establish what is happening

3.  Determine what’s right and wrong with what we are doing

4.  What did we learn or change?

5.  What else should we change going forward?

Participants can run through these steps during live meetings to
reassess the medium, the readings, the group dynamics, or any other
choices that have learning relevance. The focus in the PAR is on change:
as such, it provides a simple way to help implement the “double loop
learning” described Chris Argris <span>[</span>1<span>]</span>.

### Reference

1.  Argyris, Chris. “[Teaching smart people how to
    learn](http://pds8.egloos.com/pds/200805/20/87/chris_argyris_learning.pdf).”
    Harvard Business Review, 69.3, 1991.

### Resources

1.  <span><http://delicious.com/hrheingold/webconferencing></span>

2.  <span><http://www.mindmeister.com/12213323/best-online-collaboration-tools-2012-robin-good-s-collaborative-map></span>


# How to organize a MOOC


Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are online learning events that can
take place synchronously and asynchronously for months. Participants
assemble to hear, see, and participate in backchannel communication
during live lectures. They read the same texts at the same time,
according to a calendar. Learning takes place through self-organized
networks of participants, and is almost completely decentralized:
individuals and groups create blogs or wikis around their own
interpretations of the texts and lectures, and comment on each other’s
work; each individual and group publicises their RSS feed, which are
automatically aggregated by a special (freely available) tool,
gRSShopper. Every day, an email goes out to all participants,
aggregating activity streams from all the blogs and wikis that engage
that week’s material. MOOCs are a practical application of a learning
theory known as “connectivism” that situates learning in the networks of
connections made between individuals and between texts.

Not all MOOCs are Connectivist MOOCs (or *cMOOCs*).  Platforms such as
[Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/), [edX](https://www.edx.org/) and
[Udacity](http://www.udacity.com/) offering MOOCs which follow a more
traditional, centralized approach (these are sometimes called *xMOOCs*).
In this type of MOOC, a professor is taking the lead and the
learning-experience is organized top-down. However, some xMOOCs seem to
adopt a more blended approach. For instance, the course *[E-learning and
Digital Cultures](https://www.coursera.org/course/edc)* makes use of
online spaces beyond the Coursera environment, and the course organizers
want some aspects of participation in this course to involve the wider
social web.

In this chapter we’ll focus on cMOOCs.  One might wonder why a course
would want to be ‘massive’ and what ‘*massive*’ means. cMOOC-pioneer
Stephen Downes explains that his focus is on the development of a
*network structure*, as opposed to a *group structure*, to manage the
course. In a network structure there isn’t any central focus, for
example, a central discussion. That’s also the reason why he
considers the figure of 150 active participants – *Dunbar’s Number* – to
be the lower cut-off in order to talk about ‘massive’:

> **Stephen Downes**: Why Dunbar’s number? The reason is that it
> represents the maximum (theoretical) number of people a person can
> reasonably interact with. How many blogs can a person read, follow and
> respond to? Maybe around 150, if Dunbar is correct. Which means that
> if we have 170 blogs, then the blogs don’t constitute a ‘core’ -
> people begin to be selective about which blogs they’re reading, and
> different (and interacting) subcommunities can form.

A learning theory for the digital age
-

Traditionally, scholars distinguish between three main [categories of
learning
theories](http://ryan2point0.wordpress.com/2010/01/12/taxonomy-of-learning-theories/):
*behaviorism*, *cognitivism* and *constructivism*. Stephen Downes and
others would add a fourth
one: [connectivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connectivism), but this
is [disputed](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Connectivism).  The
central application of connectivism to date is as a theory of what
happens in Massive Open Online Courses.

The connectivist theory describes learning as a process of creating
connections and developing networks. It is based on the premise that
knowledge exists out in the world, rather than inside an individual’s
mind. Connectivism sees the network as a central metaphor for learning,
with a node in the network being a concept (data, feelings, images,
etc.) that can be meaningfully related to other nodes. Not all
connections are of equal strength in this metaphor; in fact, many
connections may be quite weak.

On a practical level, this approach recommends that learning should
focus on where to find information (streams), and how to evaluate and
mash up those streams, rather than trying to enter lots of (perishable)
information into one’s skull. Knowing the pipes is more important than
knowing what exactly each pipe contains at a given moment.  This is the
theory.  The practice takes place in Connectivist MOOCs (cMOOCs), like
[Change11](http://change.mooc.ca/about.htm).  Here, people are free to
participate at will.  Each week a subject is discussed during
synchronous sessions, which are recorded and uploaded for reference on
the Change11 website. The site also includes an archive of daily
newsletters and RSS-feeds of blog posts and tweets from participants.

cMOOCs tend to be learner-centered. People are encouraged to pursue
their own interests and link up with others who might help them. But the
distributed and free nature of the projects also leads to complaints;
participants often find it confusing when they attempt to follow up on
all the discussions (the facilitators say one should not try to follow
up on *all* the content).

> **Stephen Downes**: This implies a pedagogy that (a) seeks to describe
> ‘successful’ networks (as identified by their properties, which I have
> characterized as diversity, autonomy, openness, and connectivity); and
> (b) seeks to describe the practices that lead to such networks, both
> in the individual and in society (which I have characterized as
> modeling and demonstration (on the part of a teacher) and practice and
> reflection (on the part of a learner).

Anatomy of a cMOOC


One example of a MOOC that claims to embody the connectivist theory is
[change.mooc.ca](http://change.mooc.ca/index.html). The “[how it
works](http://change.mooc.ca/how.htm)” section of the site explains what
connectivism means in practice.  The MOOC organizers developed a number
of ways to combine the distributed nature of the discussions with the
need for a constantly updated overview and for a federated structure.
So, if your team wants to organize an open online course, these are five
points to take into consideration:

There is no body of content the participants have to memorize, but the
learning results from activities they undertake. The activities are
different for each person. A course schedule with suggested reading,
assignments for synchronous or asynchronous sessions is provided (e.g.
using Google Docs spreadsheets internally, Google Calendar externally;
one could also use a wiki), but participants are free to pick and choose
what they work on. Normally there is a topic, activities, reading
resources and often a guest speaker for each week. One should even
reflect upon the question whether a start- and end date are actually
needed. It is crucial to explain the particular philosophy of this kind
of MOOC, and this right from the outset, because chances are learners
will come with expectations informed by their more traditional learning
experiences.

1.  It is important to discuss the “internal” aspects, such as
    self-motivation: what do the participants want to achieve, what is
    their larger goal? And what are their intentions when they select
    certain activities (rather than other possibilities)? Everyone has
    her own intended outcome. Suggest that participants meditate on all
    this and jot down their objectives. And how can they avoid becoming
    stressed out and getting depressed because they feel they cannot
    “keep up with all this?” The facilitators should have a good look at
    these motivations, even if it’s impossible to assist every
    participant individually (for large-scale MOOCs).

2.  Ideally, participants should prepare for this course by acquiring
    the necessary digital skills.  Which skills are “necessary” can be
    decided by the group itself in advance. It’s all about selecting,
    choosing, remixing - also called “curating”. There are lots of tools
    which you can use for this: blogs, social bookmarks, wikis,
    mindmaps, forums, social dashboards, networks such as Twitter with
    their possibilities such as hashtags and lists. Maybe these tools
    are self-evident for some, but not necessarily for all the
    participants.

3.  The course is not located in one place but is distributed across the
    web: on various blogs and blogging platforms, on various groups and
    online networks, on photo- and video-sharing platforms, on mindmaps
    and other visualization platforms, on various tools for synchronous
    sessions. This wide variety is in itself an important learning
    element.

4.  There are weekly synchronous sessions (using Blackboard collaborate,
    or similar group chatting tool). During these sessions, experts and
    participants give presentations and enter into discussions. Groups
    of participants also have synchronous meetings at other venues (such
    as Second Life). Try to plan this well in advance!

5.  Many participants highly appreciate efforts to give an overview of
    the proceedings. Specifically, the [Daily
    Newsletter](http://change.mooc.ca/newsletter.htm) is a kind of hub,
    a community newspaper. In that Daily there is also a list of the
    blog posts mentioning the course-specific tag (e.g. “Change11”),
    also the tweets with hashtag \#change11 are listed in the Daily. Of
    course, the MOOC has a
    [site](http://change.mooc.ca/index.html) where sessions, newsletters
    and other resources are archived and discussion threads can be read.

From the very beginning of the course, it’s necessary to explain
the importance of tagging the various contributions, to suggest
a hashtag.

For harvesting all this distributed content, Stephen Downes advocates
the use of [gRSShopper](http://grsshopper.downes.ca/index.html), which
is a personal web environment that combines resource aggregation, a
personal dataspace, and personal publishing (Downes developed it and
would like to build a hosted version - eventually financed via
Kickstarter). The gRSShopper can be found on a registration page, which
is useful primarily for sending the newsletter. It allows you to
organize your online content any way you want, to import content - your
own or others’ - from remote sites, to remix and repurpose it, and to
distribute it as RSS, web pages, JSON data, or RSS feeds.

> **Stephen Downes**: For example, the gRSShopper harvester will harvest
> a link from a given feed. A person, if he or she has admin privileges,
> can transform this link into a post, adding his or her own comments.
> The post will contain information about the original link’s author and
> journal. Content in gRSShopper is created and manipulated through the
> use of system code that allows administrators to harvest, map, and
> display data, as well as to link to and create their own content.
> gRSShopper is also intended to act as a fully-fledged publishing tool.

Alternatives for registrations: Google Groups for instance. But specific
rules about privacy should be dealt with: what will be the status of the
contributions? In this MOOC the status is public and open by default,
for Downes this is an important element of the course.

Technologies


Some MOOCs use Moodle, but Downes dislikes the centralization aspect and
it’s not as open as it could be, saying “people feel better writing in
their own space.” Other possibilities: Google Groups, Wordpress, Diigo,
Twitter, Facebook page, Second Life; but each course uses different
mixtures of the many tools out there. People choose their environment -
whether it is WoW or Minecraft. Students use Blogger, WordPress, Tumblr,
Posterous as blogging tools.

RSS harvesting is a key element
-

Give participants a means to contribute their blogfeed. In “[Add a New
Feed](http://change.mooc.ca/new_feed.htm),” Downes explains how to get
this structure and additional explanations (via videos) in order to
contribute their blog feed. The administrator in this case uses
gRSShopper to process the content and put it in a database, process it
and send it to other people. Alternatively one can use Google Reader
(the list of feeds is available as an OPML file - which can be imported
to other platforms). There is also a plug-in for Wordpress that lets you
use a Google Doc spreadsheet for the feeds, then  Wordpress for the
aggregation). Many other content management systems have RSS harvesting
features.

Each individual could run her own aggregator, but Downes offers it as a
service. But aggregators are needed, whether individual, centralized or
both.

### Specialized harvesting

Using Twitter, Diigo, Delicious, Google Groups, If This Then That
([IFTTT](http://ifttt.com)) and [Feed43](http://feed43.com) (take
ordinary web page and turn it into an RSS feed).

### Synchronous environments

Synchronous platforms include Blackboard Collaborate (used now for
Change11); Adobe Connect; Big Blue Button; WizIQ; Fuze; WebX;
webcasting; web radio; videoconferencing with Skype or Google Hangout in
conjunction with Livestream or ustream.tv. Or take the Skype/Hangout
audiostream and broadcast is as webradio. Set up and test ahead of time,
but don’t hesitate to experiment.  Note also, there is a more extensive
discussion of [real-time
tools](http://peeragogy.org/real-time-meetings/) in another section of
the handbook.

### Newsletter or Feeds

Feeds are very important (see earlier remarks about the Daily
newsletter). You can use Twitter or a Facebook page, Downes uses email,
also creates an RSS version through gRSShopper and sends it through
Ifttt.com back to Facebook and Twitter. For the rest of us there is
Wordpress, which you can use to [create an email news
letter](http://www.wpbeginner.com/wp-tutorials/create-a-free-email-newsletter-service-using-wordpress/%20). 
Downs also suggests this handy guide on [how to design and build an
email newsletter without loosing your
mind](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2010/01/19/design-and-build-an-email-newsletter-without-losing-your-mind/)!

Consider using a content management system and databases to put out
specialized pages and the newsletter in an elegant way, but it requires
a learning curve. Otherwise, use blogs / wikis.

### the Use of Comments

Participants are strongly encouraged to comment on each others’ blogs
and to launch discussion threads. By doing so they practice a
fundamental social media skill - developing networks by commenting on
various places and engaging in conversations. It is important to have
activities and get people to be involved rather than sit back. For an
in-depth presentation, have a look at [Facilitating a Massive Open
Online Course](http://www.downes.ca/presentation/290) by Stephen Downes,
in which he focuses on research and survey issues, preparing events, and
other essentials.

Resources


-   Change MOOC: [How this Course Works](http://change.mooc.ca/how.htm)
-   [What is a MOOC](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eW3gMGqcZQc) (video)
-   [Success in a MOOC](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8avYQ5ZqM0)
    (video)
-   [Knowledge in a MOOC](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWKdhzSAAG0)
    (video)
-   [Introduction and
    invitation](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mqnyhLfNH3I) (video)


# How to put Peeragogy into Action



We have been writing the missing manual for peer-produced peer learning
– the “Peeragogy Handbook” ([peeragogy.org](http://peeragogy.org/)).
While building this book, we, ourselves peer learners in this
quest, have been mindful of these four questions:

1.  *How does a motivated group of self-learners choose a subject or
    skill to learn? *

2.  *How can this group identify and select the best learning resources
    about that topic? *

3.  *How will these learners identify and select the appropriate
    technology and communications tools and platforms to accomplish
    their learning goal?*

4.  *What does the group need to know about learning theory and practice
    to put together a successful peer-learning program?*

It is clear to us that the techniques of peer production that have built
and continue to improve *Wikipedia* and GNU/Linux have yet to fully
demonstrate their power in education. We believe that the *Peeragogy
Handbook* can help change that by building a distributed community of
peer learners/educators, and a strongly vetted collection of best
practices. Our project complements others’ work on sites like
Wikiversity and P2PU, and builds upon understandings that have developed
informally in distributed communities of hobbyists and professionals, as
well as in (and beyond) the classrooms of generations of passionate
educators. Here, we present Peeragogy in Action, a project guide in four
parts. Each part relates to one or more sections of our handbook, and
suggests activities to try while you explore peer learning. These
activities are designed for flexible use by widely distributed groups,
collaborating via a light-weight infrastructure. Participants may be
educators, community organizers, designers, hackers, dancers, students,
seasoned peeragogues, or first-timers. The guide should be useful for
groups who want to build a strong collaboration, as well as to
facilitators or theorists who want to hone their practice or approach.
Together, we will use our various talents to build effective methods and
models for peer produced peer learning. Let’s get started!

**Setting the initial challenge and building a framework for
accountability among participants is an important starting point.**

*Activity* – Come up with a plan for your work and an agreement, or
informal contract, for your group. You can use the suggestions in this
guide as a starting point, but your first task is to revise the plan to
suit your needs. It might be helpful to ask: What are you interested in
learning? What is your primary intended outcome? What problem do you
hope to solve?  How collaborative does your project need to be? How will
the participants’ expertise in the topic vary? What sort of support will
you and other participants require? What problems won’t you solve?

*Technology* – Familiarize yourself with the collaboration tools you
intend to use (e.g. WordPress, Git and LaTeX, YouTube, GIMP, a public
wiki, a private forum, or something else) and create a first post, edit,
or video introducing yourself and your project(s) to others in the
worldwide peeragogy community.

*Suggested Resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts I
(‘[Introduction](http://peeragogy.org/)’) and II
(‘[Motivation](http://peeragogy.org/motivation/)’). You may also want to
work through a short lesson called [Implementing
Paragogy](https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/User:Arided/ImplementingParagogy), from
the early days before the Peeragogy project was convened. For a succinct
theoretical treatment, please refer to our literature review, which we
have adapted into a [Wikipedia
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer_learning).

*Further Reading* – Boud, D. and Lee, A. (2005). *‘Peer learning’ as
pedagogic discourse for research education*. Studies in Higher
Education, 30(5):501–516.

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – We had a fairly weak project
structure at the outset, which yielded mixed results. One participant
said: “I definitely think I do better when presented with a framework or
scaffold to use for participation or content development.” Yet the same
person wrote with enthusiasm about models of entrepreneurship, saying
she was “freed of the requirement or need for an entrepreneurial
visionary.”

**Other people can support you in achieving your goal and make the work
more fun too.**

*Activity* – Write an invitation to someone who can help as a
co-facilitator on your project. Clarify what you hope to learn from them
and what your project has to offer. Helpful questions to consider as you
think about who to invite: What resources are available or missing? What
do you already have that you can build on? How will you find the
necessary resources? Who else is interested in these kinds of
challenges? Go through the these questions again when you have a small
group, and come up with a list of more people you’d like to invite or
consult with as the project progresses.

*Technology* – Identify tools that could potentially be useful during
the project, even if it’s new to you. Start learning how to use them.
Connect with people in other locales who share similar interests or know
the tools.

*Suggested resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts IV (‘[Convening a
Group](http://peeragogy.org/convening-a-group/)’) and V (‘[Organizing a
Learning
Context](http://peeragogy.org/organizing-a-learning-context/)’).

*Recommended Reading* – Schmidt, J. Philipp. (2009). Commons-Based Peer
Production and education. Free Culture Research Workshop Harvard
University, 23 October 2009.

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – We used a strategy of “open
enrollment.” New people were welcome to join the project at any time. We
also encouraged people to either stay involved or withdraw; several
times over the first year, we required participants to explicitly
reaffirm interest in order to stay registered in the forum and mailing
list.

**Solidifying your work plan and learning strategy together with
concrete measures for ‘success’ can move the project forward
significantly.**

*Activity* – Distill your ideas by writing an essay, making visual
sketches, or creating a short video to communicate the unique plans for
organization and evaluation that your group will use. By this time, you
should have identified which aspects of the project need to be refined
or expanded. Dive in!

*Technology* – Take time to mentor others or be mentored by someone,
meeting up in person or online. Pair up with someone else and share
knowledge together about one or more tools. You can discuss some of the
difficulties that you’ve encountered, or teach a beginner some tricks.

*Suggested resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts VI
(‘[Cooperation](http://peeragogy.org/co-facilitation/)’), VII
(‘[Assessment](http://peeragogy.org/assessment/)’), and at least some of
part II (‘[Peeragogy in
Practice](http://peeragogy.org/patterns-usecases/)’).

*Recommended reading* – Argyris, Chris. “Teaching smart people how to
learn.” Harvard Business Review 69.3 (1991); and, Gersick, Connie J.G.
“Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new model of group
development.” Academy of Management Journal 31.1 (1988): 9-41.

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – Perhaps one of the most
important roles in the Peeragogy project was the role of the ‘Wrapper’,
who prepared and circulated weekly summaries of forum activity. This
helped people stay informed about what was happening in the project even
if they didn’t have time to read the forums. We’ve also found that small
groups of people who arrange their own meetings are often the most
productive.

**Wrap up the project with a critical assessment of progress and
directions for future work. Share any changes to this syllabus that you
think would be useful for future peeragogues!**

*Activity* – Identify the main obstacles you encountered. What are some
goals you were not able to accomplish yet? Did you foresee these
challenges at the outset? How did this project resemble or differ from
others you’ve worked on? How would you do things differently in future
projects? What would you like to tackle next?

*Writing* – Communicate your reflection case. Prepare a short written or
multimedia essay, dealing with your experiences in this course. Share
the results by posting it where others in the broader Peeragogy project
can find it.

*‘Extra credit’* – Contribute back to one of the other organisations or
projects that helped you on this peeragogical journey. Think about what
you have to offer. Is it a bug fix, a constructive critique, pictures,
translation help, PR, wiki-gnoming or making a cake? Make it something
special, and people will remember you and thank you for it.

*Suggested resources* – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts VIII
(‘[Technologies, Services, and
Platforms](http://peeragogy.org/resources/technologies/)’) and IX
(‘[Resources](http://peeragogy.org/resources/)’).

*Recommended reading* – Stallman, Richard. “[Why software should be
free](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/shouldbefree.html)” (1992).

*Observations from the Peeragogy project* – When we were deciding how to
license our work,  we decided to use CC0, emphasizing  ‘re-usability’
and hoping that other people would come and remix the handbook.  At the
moment, we’re still waiting to see the first remix edition, but we’re
confident that it will come along in due course.  Maybe you’ll be the
one who makes it!

<span>Micro-</span>Case Study: The Peeragogy Project, Year 1


Since its conception in early 2012, the Peeragogy Project has collected
over 3700 comments in our discussion forum, and over 200 pages of
expository text in the handbook. It has given contributors a new way of
thinking about things together. However, the project has not had the
levels of engagement that should be possible, given the technology
available, the global interest in improving education, and the number of
thoughful participants who expressed interest. We hope that the handbook
and this accompanying syllabus will provide a seed for a new phase of
learning, with many new contributors and new ideas drawn from real-life
applications.

<span>Micro-</span>Case Study: The Peeragogy Project, Year 2


10 new handbook contributors joined in the project’s second year. We’ve
begun a series of weekly Hangouts on Air that have brought in many
additional discussants, all key people who can help to fulfil
peeragogy’s promise.  The handbook has been considerably improved
through edits and discussion.  The next step for us is putting this work
into action in the *Peeragogy Accelerator*.

<span>Micro-</span>Case Study: The Peeragogy Project, Year 3


We published our plans as “Building the Peeragogy Accelerator”,
presenting it at OER14 and inviting feedback. In the run up to this, we
had been very active creating additional abstracts and submitting them
to conferences. However, despite our efforts we failed to recruit any
newcomers for the trial run of the Accelerator. Even so, piloting the
Accelerator with some of our own projects worked reasonably well,[^1]
but we decided to focus on the handbook in the second half of the year.
As the project’s line-up shifted, participants reaffirmed the importance
of having “no camp counsellors.” In the last quarter of 2014, we created
the workbook that is now presented in Part I, as a quickstart guide to
peeragogy. We also revised the pattern catalog, and used the revised
format to create a “distributed roadmap” for the Peeragogy project –
featured in Chapter [distributed-roadmap] of the third edition of the
handbook.

[^1]: For an overview, see <http://is.gd/up_peeragogy_accelerator>.

# Recommended Reading


“Good faith collaboration”
--

1.  Reagle, J. M. (2010). Good faith collaboration: The culture of
    Wikipedia, MIT Press.

Writings about fun and boredom


1.  Kano, J. (1995/2013). [The Contribution of Judo to
    Education](http://judoinfo.com/kano.htm).

2.  Pale King, unfinished novel, by David Foster Wallace

3.  On the Poverty of Student Life, by Mustapha Khayati

The structure of learning
-

Check out work by Bruce Tuckman, Gilly Salmon, Ken Wilber, Martin
Oliver, Gráinne Conole, Ruth Deakin-Crick, Howard Gardner, and Mihaly
Csíkszentmihályi.

Motivation
-

1.  Simon Sinek, Start With Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone To
    Take Action, Penguin Books, 2011

Case Study: 5PH1NX


1.  Senge, Peter. “The fifth discipline: The art and science of the
    learning organization.” *New York: Currency Doubleday* (1990).

Alexandrian Design Patterns


1.  Article, “Manifesto 1991” by Christopher Alexander, Progressive
    Architecture, July 1991, pp. 108–112, provides a brief summary of
    Alexander’s ideas in the form of a critique of mainstream
    architecture. Many of the same sorts of critical points would carry
    over to mainstream education. Some highlights are excerpted
    [here](https://plus.google.com/u/0/108598104736826154120/posts/agWYcqPhqSN).

2.  [The Origins of Pattern Theory, the Future of the Theory, And The
    Generation of a Living
    World](http://www.patternlanguage.com/archive/ieee/ieeetext.htm),
    Christopher Alexander’s talk at the 1996 ACM Conference on
    Object-Oriented Programs, Systems, Languages and Applications
    (OOPSLA)

On Newcomers


1.  OpenHatch.org, “an open source community aiming to help newcomers
    find their way into free software projects.”

2.  [Why do newcomers abandon open source software
    projects?](http://lapessc.ime.usp.br/public/papers/13872/CHASE13_present.pdf)
    (sildes by Igor Steinmacher and coauthors)

Antipatterns


1.  The [Sapir-Whorf
    Hypothesis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity)

2.  Bourdieu’s notion of “[symbolic
    violence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_violence)”.

SWATs
--

1.  Cavallo, David. “Emergent design and learning environments: Building
    on indigenous knowledge.” IBM Systems Journal 39.3.4 (2000):
    768-781.

Convening a Group
--

1.  Engeström, Y. (1999). Innovative learning in work teams: Analyzing
    cycles of knowledge creation in practice. In Y. Engeström, R.
    Miettinen & R.-L-. Punamäki (Eds.), *Perspectives on activity
    theory*, (pp. 377-404). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press

2.  Gersick, C. (1988). Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new
    model of group development. *Academy of Management Journal* 31
    (Oct.): 9-41.

3.  Mimi Ito’s observations about [manga fan groups co-learning
    Japanese](http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/full_pdfs/hanging_out.pdf)

4.  Rheingold U, [MindAmp
    groups](http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/mindamp5/lockedwiki/main-page)

5.  Shneiderman, B. (2007). [Creativity support tools: accelerating
    discovery and
    innovation](http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1323688.1323689). *Commun.
    ACM* 50, 12 (December 2007), 20-32.

6.  David de Ugarte, Phyles.
    ([Summary](http://david.lasindias.com/phyles/))
    ([Book](http://deugarte.com/gomi/phyles.pdf))

7.  Scheidel, T. M., & Crowell, L. (1964). Idea development in small
    discussion groups. *Quarterly Journal of Speech*, 50, 140-145.

8.  Scheidel, T. M., & Crowell, L. (1979), *Discussing and Deciding - A
    Desk Book for Group Leaders and Members*, Macmillan Publishing

9.  Ozturk and Simsek, “Of Conflict in Virtual Learning Communiities in
    the Context of a Democratic Pedagogy: A paradox or sophism?,” in
    *Proceedings of the Networked Learning Conference, 2012,
    Maastricht.*
    [Video](http://www.google.com/search?client=chrome-mobile&sourceid=chrome-mobile&ie=UTF-8&q=Of+Conflict+in+Virtual+Learning+Communiities+in+the+Context+of+a+Democratic+Pedagogy)
    or
    [text](http://networkedlearningconference.org.uk/abstracts/pdf/ozturk.pdf).

10. Paragogy Handbook, [How to Organize a
    MOOC](http://peeragogy.org/organizing-a-learning-context/connectivism-in-practice-how-to-organize-a-mooc/)

11. Cathy Davidson et al., [How a Class Becomes a
    Community](http://news.rapgenius.com/Cathy-davidson-how-a-class-becomes-a-community-theory-method-examples-chapter-one-lyrics)

K-12 Peeragogy
--

### For pointers to tools for your classroom, check out:

-   [Richard Byrne](http://www.freetech4teachers.com/)
-   [Sylvia Tolisano](http://langwitches.org/blog/)
-   [Caitlin
    Tucker](http://catlintucker.com/2011/11/12-tech-tools-that-will-transform-your-classroom/)
-   [Vicki Davis](http://coolcatteacher.blogspot.ca/)

### How to develop your PLN:

-   [Degrees of Connected
    Teaching](%20http://thecleversheep.blogspot.ca/2012/06/seven-degrees-of-connectedness_06.html)
    by Rodd Lucier
-   [TeachThought](%20http://thecleversheep.blogspot.ca/2012/06/seven-degrees-of-connectedness_06.html)

### Theory & philosophy of connnected learning for classroom transformation:

-   [David Truss](http://pairadimes.davidtruss.com/)
-   [Steven Downes](http://www.downes.ca/presentation/264)
-   [Will Richardson](http://willrichardson.com/)

Adding Structure with Activities
--

1.  [The d.school Bootcamp
    Bootleg](http://dschool.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/BootcampBootleg2010v2SLIM.pdf)
    (CC-By-NC-SA) includes lots of fun activities to try. Can you crack
    the code and define new ones that are equally cool?

2.  Puzio, R. S. (2005). “On free math and copyright bottlenecks.” *Free
    Culture and the Digital Library Symposium Proceedings*.

Co-Facilitation


1.  [Peer Education: Training of Trainers
    Manual](http://www.scribd.com/doc/54544925/51/TRAINING-TOPIC-Co-facilitation-skills);
    UN Interagency Group on Young Peoples Health

2.  [Co
    Facilitating](http://www.breakoutofthebox.com/Co-FacilitatingPfeifferJones.pdf):
    Advantages & Potential Disadvantages. J. Willam Pfeifer and John E
    Johnes

3.  [Summary](http://reviewing.co.uk/archives/art/13_1_what_do_facilitators_do.htm#8_WAYS_OF_FACILITATING_ACTIVE_LEARNING)
    of John Heron’s model of the role of facilitators

4.  [Carl Rogers, Core Conditions and
    Education](http://www.infed.org/thinkers/et-rogers.htm),
    Encyclopedia of Informal Education

5.  [Peer Mediation](http://www.studygs.net/peermed.htm), Study Guides
    and Strategies

6.  [Co-Facilitation: The Advantages and
    Challenges](http://sk.cupe.ca/updir/cofacilitation-handouts.doc),
    Canadian Union of Public Employees

7.  [Bohemia Interactive Community Wiki
    Guidelines](http://community.bistudio.com/wiki/Bohemia_Interactive_Community:Guidelines)

8.  Barrett-Lennard, G. T. (1998) *[Carl Roger’s Helping System. Journey
    and
    Substance](http://openlibrary.org/works/OL2014352W/Carl_Rogers'_Helping_System)*,
    London: Sage

9.  [5 Pillars of
    Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Five_pillars&oldid=501472166),
    from Wikipedia

10. *[Training the
    Force](http://www.africom.mil/WO-NCO/DownloadCenter/%5C40Publications/Training%20the%20Force%20Manual.pdf)*
    (2002) US Army Field Manual \#FM 7-0 (FM 25-100)

11. [Learning Reimagined: Participatory, Peer, Global,
    Online](http://dmlcentral.net/blog/howard-rheingold/learning-reimagined-participatory-peer-global-online),
    by Howard Rheingold

12. [Research Gate](http://www.researchgate.net/) is a network dedicated
    to science and research, in which members connect, collaborate and
    discover scientific publications, jobs and conferences.

13. [Creating and Facilitating Peer Support
    Groups](http://ctb.ku.edu/en/tablecontents/section_1180.aspx), by
    The Community Tool Box

14. [Facilitation
    Tips](http://www1.villanova.edu/content/villanova/artsci/vcle/resources/toolkit/_jcr_content/pagecontent/download_8/file.res/FacilitationTips.doc),
    by Villanova University

15. [Herding Passionate Cats: The Role of Facilitator in a Peer Learning Process](http://pippabuchanan.com/2011/09/04/herding-passionate-cats-the-role-of-facilitator-in-a-peer-learning-process/),
    by Pippa Buchanan

16. [Reflective Peer Facilitation: Crafting Collaborative
    Self-Assessment](http://webpages.sou.edu/~vidmar/SOARS2008/vidmar.ppt),
    by Dale Vidmar, Southern Oregon University Library

17. [Effective
    Co-Facilitation](http://www.umass.edu/ewc/ea/Facilitation%20Skills/important%20tips.doc),
    by Everywoman’s Center, University of Massachussetts

18. “[Teaching smart people how to
    learn](www.ncsu.edu/park_scholarships/pdf/chris_argyris_learning.pdf?)”
    by Chris Argyris, Harvard Business Review 69.3, 1991; also published
    in expanded form as a
    [book](http://www.amazon.com/Teaching-People-Harvard-Business-Classics/dp/1422126005)
    with the same name.

Assessment
-

1.  Morgan, C. and M. O’Reilly. (1999). [Assessing Open and distance
    learners.](http://www.amazon.com/Assessing-Distance-Learners-Flexible-Learning/dp/0749428783/ref=tmm_pap_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1388199564&sr=1-1)
    London: Kogan Page Limited.

2.  Schmidt, J. P., Geith, C., Håklev, S. and J. Thierstein. (2009).
    [Peer-To-Peer Recognition of Learning in Open
    Education](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/641/1389).
    *International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning*.
    Volume 10, Number 5.

3.  L.S. Vygotsky: [Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psychological
    Processes](http://books.google.com/books?id=RxjjUefze_oC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_atb#v=onepage&q&f=false)

4.  [Reijo
    Miettinen](http://org.sagepub.com/search?author1=Reijo+Miettinen&sortspec=date&submit=Submit)
    and [Jaakko
    Virkkunen](http://org.sagepub.com/search?author1=Jaakko+Virkkunen&sortspec=date&submit=Submit),
    [Epistemic Objects, Artifacts and Organizational
    Change](http://org.sagepub.com/content/12/3/437.abstract),
    *Organization,* May 2005, 12: 437-456.

Technologies, Services, and Platforms
-

1.  Irene Greif and Sunil Sarin (1987): Data Sharing in Group Work, ACM
    Transactions on Office Information Systems, vol. 5, no. 2, April
    1987, pp. 187-211.

2.  Irene Greif (ed.) (1988): Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: A
    Book of Readings, San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufman.

3.  Irene Greif (1988): Remarks in panel discussion on “CSCW: What does
    it mean?”, CSCW \`88. Proceedings of the Conference on
    Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, September 26-28, 1988,
    Portland, Oregon, ACM, New York, NY.

4.  Kammersgaard, J., Four Different Perspectives on Human-Computer
    Interaction. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 28(4):
    343-362 (1988)

5.  DeSanctis, G. and Poole, M. S. 1994, ‘Capturing the complexity in
    advanced technology use: Adaptive structuration theory’,
    Organisation Science, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 121-47.

6.  Norman, D. A. 1986, ‘Cognitive engineering’, in Norman, D. A. and
    Draper, S. W., (eds) User Centered System Design: New Perspectives
    on Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 31-61. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum and Associates.

7.  Vessey, I. and Galletta, D. 1991, ‘Cognitive fit: An empirical study
    of information acquisition’, Information Systems Research, vol. 2,
    no. 1, pp. 63-84.

### Real-Time Meetings

1.  Howard Rheingold’s webconferencing
    [bookmarks](http://delicious.com/hrheingold/webconferencing) on
    Delicious.

### Additional Tips from an open source perspective

Care of User:Neophyte on the Teaching Open Source wiki.

1.  The Art of Community

2.  Open Advice

3.  The Open Source Way

Forums


1.  Rheingold, H. [Why use forums?](http://blip.tv/file/1123048) *Social
    Media Classroom*.

2.  Rheingold, H. (1998). [The Art of Hosting Good Conversations
    Online](http://www.rheingold.com/texts/artonlinehost.html).

3.  Gallagher, E. J. (2006). [Guidelines for Discussion Board
    Writing](http://www.lehigh.edu/~indiscus/doc_guidelines.html).
    Lehigh University.

4.  Gallagher, E.J. (2009). [Shaping a culture of conversation. The
    discussion board and
    beyond](http://www.academiccommons.org/2009/01/shaping-a-culture-of-conversation-the-discussion-board-and-beyond/).
    The Academic Commons.

5.  Academic Technology Center. (2010). [Improving the Use of Discussion
    Boards](http://www.wpi.edu/Academics/ATC/Collaboratory/Idea/boards.html).
    Worcester Polytechnic Institute.

Paragogy
--

1.  Corneli, J. (2010). [Implementing
    Paragogy](http://metameso.org/~joe/docs/paragogy-lesson.pdf), on
    *Wikiversity*.

2.  Corneli, J. and C. Danoff. (2010/2013). *Paragogy.net*.

Learning vs Training
--

1.  Hart, J. (April 20th, 2012). [Is it time for a BYOL (Bring Your Own
    Learning) strategy for your
    organization?](http://www.c4lpt.co.uk/blog/2012/04/20/is-it-time-for-a-byol-bring-your-own-learning-strategy-in-your-organization-byol/)
    *Learning in the Social Space. Jane Hart’s Blog.*

PLNs
-

1.  Rheingold, H. (2010). [Shelly Terrell: Global Netweaver, Curator,
    PLN
    Builder.](http://dmlcentral.net/blog/howard-rheingold/shelly-terrell-global-netweaver-curator-pln-builder)
    *DML Central*.

2.  Richardson, W. and R. Mancabelli. (2011). [Personal Learning
    Networks: Using the Power of Connection to Transform
    Education](http://www.amazon.com/Personal-Learning-Networks-Connections-Transform/dp/193554327X).
    Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree Press.

3.  Howard Rheingold’s PLN links on Delicious

Connectivism in Practice — How to Organize a MOOC (Massive Open Online Class)
--

1.  Downes & Siemens [MOOC site](http://change.mooc.ca)

2.  [What Connectivism
    Is](http://halfanhour.blogspot.com/2007/02/what-connectivism-is.html)
    by Stephen Downes

3.  [An Introduction to Connective
    Knowledge](http://www.downes.ca/post/33034) by Stephen Downes

4.  [Facilitating a Massive Open Online
    Course](http://www.downes.ca/presentation/290), by Stephen Downes

5.  [gRSShopper](http://grsshopper.downes.ca/index.html)

6.  [Connectivism: A Learning Theory for the Digital
    Age](%20http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/connectivism.htm) by
    George Siemens

7.  [A Connectivism
    Glossary](http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Connectivism_glossary)

8.  [Rhizomes and Networks](http://www.connectivism.ca/?p=329) by George
    Siemens

9.  [Rhizomatic Education: Community as
    Curriculum](http://innovateonline.info/pdf/vol4_issue5/Rhizomatic_Education-__Community_as_Curriculum.pdf)
    by Dave Cormier

10. [Knowing
    Knowledge](http://www.amazon.ca/Knowing-Knowledge-George-Siemens/dp/1430302305),
    a book by George Siemens

11. [Net Smart,](http://www.amazon.com/Net-Smart-ebook/dp/B007D5UP9G)
    Howard Rheingold (about internal and external literacies for coping
    with the ‘always on’ digital era)

12. [Massive Open Online
    Courses](http://www.learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/886/): Setting
    Up (StartToMOOC, Part 1)

13. [The MOOC guide](https://sites.google.com/site/themoocguide/)

### And, a word list for your inner edu-geek

You can read about all of these things on Wikipedia.

1.  [Constructivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivism_(philosophy_of_education))

2.  [Social
    constructivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_constructivism)

3.  [Radical
    constructivism](http://www.english.iup.edu/mmwimson/Syllabi/803/721/Radical%20Constructivism%20%20%20721.htm)

4.  [Enactivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enactivism_(psychology))

5.  [Constructionism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructionism_(learning_theory))

6.  [Connectivism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connectivism)


# Style guide


*This is a How-To Handbook.*

Keep it short
-

The easiest sections to read are those that are shorter and include some
kind of visual (video or image) and have some personal connection (i.e.
they tell a story). For anything longer, break it up into sub-pages, add
visuals, make sure each sub-page is accessible to someone (who is it?).
Think clearly of this reader, talk to them.

Make it clear
-

We’ll illustrate this point by example. The original full title of the
book was “The Peeragogy Handbook: A resource for self-organizing
self-learners”. But
“[self-organizing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-organization)” is a
technical term, and “self-learner” is a confusing neologism. We
shouldn’t use technical terms unless we explain them. So we really
shouldn’t use it in the first sentence or paragraph, or title, of the
book because we’ll scare people off or confuse them. If we want to
explain what “self-organization” means and why it is relevant for
peeragogy, then we can take a chapter to do that much later on in the
book. At the same time, we shouldn’t try to “say the same thing in a
simpler way.” We should try to get rid of the technical concept
completely and see what’s left. The easiest thing to do in such cases is
to delete the sentence completely and start over: when in doubt, speak
plainly.

Don’t overdo it with bullet points
-

Text can be very hard to read when there are more than a few bullet
points included. Numbered lists should also be used sparingly. It also
seems that when many disjointed bullet points appear, sometimes the
author is really just indexing the main points that are presented better
in someone else’s narrative. Therefor, consider replacing an entire
bulleted list with a reference to someone else’s book/webpage/chapter.
In today’s hyperlinked world, it’s easy enough for the reader to go
elsewhere to get good content (and indeed, we should make it easy for
them to find the best treatments around!). It is not very pleasant to
have to *read* a taxonomy.

Include activities


When reading, editing or otherwise working your way through the book,
please make note of any activities or exercises that come to mind, and
share them.  We’re always striving to be more practical and applicable.

Don’t be overly chatty
-

In our efforts to escape from academia-speak and simplify the text in
the handbook, it’s important to make sure we are not heading towards the
other extreme – being too conversational. When we’re having a
conversation with someone, we tend to pepper our ideas with transitional
or pivotal phrases (“In any event,” “With that said,” “As I mentioned
elsewhere,” etc.) that help to keep the talk flowing. We also go off on
brief tangents before making our way back to the main topic, and
sometimes express ourselves in run-on sentences. While this is perfectly
natural in speech, it can be confusing and complex in written text.
Let’s strive for the perfect balance of simple yet professional writing.

Additional style bonus points
--

-   Avoid double lines after paragraphs; this is a leftover from the age
    of typewriters and can create “rivers” of white space.
-   Capitalize the first word of each item in a bulleted list,
    especially if items include a verb form (this list is an example!). 
    Punctuate uniformly.
-   Capitalize the first word of headings and subheadings; lower case
    all others.

Format your HTML nicely
--

We need to be able to process the content from this Wordpress site and
turn it into various formats like LaTeX and EPUB. Our automated tools
work much better if pages are formatted with simple and uniform HTML
markup. Some key points:

-   Mark up your links: use [The Peeragogy
    Handbook](http://peeragogy.org) instead of <http://peeragogy.org>. 
    It’s best if the link text is somewhat descriptive.
-   Use a numbered list to format your references (see [Convening a
    Group](http://peeragogy.org/convening-a-group/) for one example of
    an article that gets this right!)
-   Use Heading 2 and Heading 3 tags to mark up sections,
    not **bold** text.  If you use bold or italics in your paragraphs,
    you should **check** that the markup *is actually correct*. It
    should exactly surround the words that you’re marking up
    – `<em>like this</em>` – and it should not include extra spaces
    around marked up words – `<em> NOT like this </em>.`
-   Be aware that Wordpress does not always add paragraph tags to your
    paragraphs.
-   Wordpress also tries to replace straight quote marks with “smart
    quotes”, but it sometimes doesn’t achieve the aim. If you notice
    weird quotemarks (especially in the PDF version), you can add smart
    quote marks by hand.

 

# License/Waiver


These materials are made available under the terms of [Creative Commons
0 copyright waiver](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)
instead of a “traditional” copyleft license. We the undersigned agree to
the following, wherein “this work” refers to “The Peeragogy Handbook”
and all other content posted on [peeragogy.org](http://peeragogy.org) or
the original collaboratory site,
<http://socialmediaclassroom.com/host/peeragogy>.

**I hereby waive all copyright and related or neighboring rights
together with all associated claims and causes of action with respect to
this work to the extent possible under the law.**

Signed:

-   Bryan Alexander
-   Paul Allison
-   Elisa Armendáriz
-   Régis Barondeau
-   Doug Breitbart
-   George Brett
-   Suz Burroughs
-   Joseph Corneli
-   Jay Cross
-   Charles Jeffrey Danoff
-   Julian Elve
-   María Fernanda Arenas
-   James Folkestad
-   John Graves
-   Kathy Gill
-   Matthew Herschler
-   Gigi Johnson
-   Anna Keune
-   Kyle Larson
-   Roland Legrand
-   Amanda Lyons
-   Lisa Snow MacDonald
-   Christopher Tillman Neal
-   Ted Newcomb
-   Stephanie Parker
-   Miguel Ángel Pérez Álvarez
-   Charlotte Pierce
-   David Preston
-   Howard Rheingold
-   Paola Ricaurte
-   Verena Roberts
-   Stephanie Schipper
-   Fabrizio Terzi
-   Geoff Walker

Note that this waiver does not apply to other works by the above
authors, including works linked to from
[peeragogy.org](http://peeragogy.org).  It also does not apply to
embedded content drawn from other sites and included for the reader’s
convenience.

Future contributors: Note also that we will require a similar copyright
waiver agreement. That said, the waiver also means that you are free to
do essentially whatever you like with the content in your own work! Have
fun!

### How we came to this decision

These Creative Commons license options were proposed by various members
of the community:

- *CC Zero* - public domain; no restrictions for downstream users
- *CC By-SA* - requires downstream users to include attribution and to license their work in the same way
- *CC By-SA-NC* - requires downstream users to include attribution, to
    license their work in the same way and disallows any commercial
    use of the content

After a brief discussion, no one was in favor of restricting downstream
users, so we decided to go with CC0. We agreed that we would get enough
“credit” by having our names on [peeragogy.org](http://peeragogy.org/).
In connection with this discussion, we agreed that we would work on ways
to explicitly build “reusability” into the handbook content.
