---
title: Introduction
---

> We live where no one knows the answer and the struggle is to figure
> out the question. [1]

Welcome to the *Peeragogy Handbook*! We want to kick things off with a
candid confession: we’re not going to pretend that this book is perfect.
In fact, it’s not an ordinary book at all. The adventure starts when you
get out your pen or pencil, or mouse and keyboard, and begin marking it
up. It gets kicked into high gear when you join *Peeragogy in Action*.
You’ll find a lot of friendly support as you write, draw, or dance your
own peeragogical adventure. But first, what is *peeragogy*?

Peeragogy is a flexible framework of techniques for peer learning and
peer knowledge production. Whereas pedagogy deals with the transmission
of knowledge from teachers to students, peeragogy is what people use to
produce and apply knowledge together. The strength of peeragogy is its
flexibility and scalability. The learning mind-set and strategies that
we are uncovering in the Peeragogy project can be applied in classrooms,
hackerspaces, organizations, wikis, and interconnected collaborations
across an entire society.

The *Peeragogy Handbook* is a compendium of know how for any group of
people who want to co-learn any subject together, when none of them is
an expert in the particular subject matter – learning together without
one traditional teacher, especially using the tools and knowledge
available online. What we say in the *Handbook* draws extensively on our
experiences working together on the *Handbook* – and our experiences in
other collaborative projects that drew us here in the first place. The
best way to learn about peeragogy is to do peeragogy, not just read
about it. Towards that end, coauthors and fans of the *Handbook* have an
active Google+ community, conveniently called *Peeragogy in Action*. We
maintain a regular schedule of weekly meetings that you’re welcome to
join. The *Handbook* includes a short syllabus, which also called
“Peeragogy in Action”, and you can work through this with your own group as
you read through the book.

You’re warmly invited to combine your local projects with the global
effort, and get involved in making the next edition of the *Handbook*.
That doesn’t necessarily require you to do extensive writing or editing.
We’re always interested in new use cases, tricky problems, and
interesting questions. In fact, our view is that any question is a good
question.

Here are some of the ways in which the current edition of the Handbook
is *not perfect*. You’re welcome to add to the list! These are
places where you can jump in and get involved.  This list gives a
sense of the challenges that we face putting peeragogy into action.

# Scrapbook of Peeragogical Problems

## Maintaining a list of useful resources 

We include references and recommended reading in the *Handbook*, and
there are a lot more links that have been shared in the *Peeragogy in
Action* community.  It’s a ongoing task to catalog and improve these
resources – including books, videos, images, projects, technology, etc.
In short, let’s “Reduce, Reuse, Recycle”!  As a good start, Charlotte
Pierce has been maintaining a spreadsheet under the heading “survey” in
our Google Drive.

##  Developing a really accessible DIY tool-kit 

A short “workbook” containing interviews and some activities follows
this introduction, but it could be much more interactive. Amanda Lyons
and Paola Ricaurte made several new exercises and drawings that we could
include. A more developed workbook could be split off from the handbook
into a separate publication. It would be great to have something simple
for onramping. For example, the workbook could be accompanied by video
tutorials for new contributors.

Paola Ricaurte points out that a really useful book will be easy to
sell. For teachers interested in peeragogy, this needs to be something
that can be use in workshops or on their own, to write in, to think
through issues. We’re partway there, but to improve things, we really
need a better set of activities.

The next time Paola or someone else uses the handbook or workbook to run
a workshop, she can say, “turn to this page, let’s answer this question,
you have 10 minutes.” There are lots of places where the writing in the
handbook could be made more interactive. One technique Paola and Amanda
used was turning “statements” from the handbook into “questions.”

## Crafting a visual identity 

Amanda also put together the latest cover art, with some collaboration
from Charlotte using inDesign. A more large-scale visual design would be
a good goal for the 4th Edition of the book. Fabrizio Terzi, who made
the handbook cover art for the 1st Edition, has been working on making
our website more friendly. So, again, work is in progress but we could
use your help.

## Workflow for the 4th edition 

We’ve uploaded the content of the book to Github and are editing the
“live” version of the site in Markdown. For this and previous print
editions, we’ve converted to LaTeX. There are a number of workflow
bottlenecks: First, people need to be comfortable updating the content
on the site. Second, it would be good to have more people involved with
the technical editing work that goes into compiling for print. Remember,
when we produce an actual physical handbook, we can sell it. In fact,
because all co-authors have transferred their copyright in this book to
the Public Domain, *anyone* can print and sell copies, convert the
material into new interactive forms, or do just about anything with it.

## Translations 

Translating a book that’s continually being revised is pretty much a
nightmare. With due respect to the valiant volunteer efforts that have
been attempted so far, it might be more convenient for everyone involved to
just pay professional translators or find a way to foster a multi-lingual
authoring community, or find a way to create a more robust process of
collective translation.  Ideas are welcome, and we're making some small
steps here.  More on this below.

## Next steps? What’s the future of the project? 

In short: If we make the Handbook even more useful, then it will be no
problem to sell more copies of it. That is one way to make money to
cover future expenses. It’s a paradigmatic example for other business
models we might use in the future. But even more important than a
business model is a sense of our shared vision, which is why we’re
working on a “Peeragogy Creed” (after the Taekwondo creed, which exists
in various forms, one example is [2]). No
doubt you’ll find the first version on peeragogy.org soon! Chapter
[7](./distributed_roadmap.html) contains a further list of practical next
steps for the project.

## References

1.  Joshua Schimel, 2012. “Writing Science”, Oxford University Press.

2.  Taekwondo Student Creed, World Martial Arts Academy,
    <http://www.worldtaekwondo.com/handbook.htm>


# ☞ Welcome to the *Peeragogy Workbook!* 

This booklet-within-a-book is designed to introduce you to our fun,
exciting world of peer learning and peer production!! You may already be
familiar with these terms, or they may be new to you. Either way, don’t
worry!!

If they are new, consider the following 2 examples.

1.  *Peer learning*: Joe Corneli needs to get from the suburbs of
    Chicago to the north side of the city. He gets on the commuter train
    and transfers to the purple “L” at Davis Street in Evanston. He
    plans to change to the red line at Howard Street, but the train says
    “Loop” and he asks another passenger whether it will stop at Howard.
    She says it will, but that he can save an hour of his time by riding
    express to the city and then coming back two stops! Joe makes it to
    his meeting with Charlie with plenty of time to spare.

2.  *Peer production*: Two cavewomen see lightning strike a tree and
    produce fire! Walking up to it they notice the heat and think
    “Wouldn’t it be nice to have fire for our family at night!” Once the
    rain clears, they find some dry sticks and start working together to
    figure out how they can use them to start their own flame. After
    hours of trial and error, BOOM they’ve got fire! The news travels
    fast. :)

Peeragogy is an approach to learning and working together on projects
ranging from the mundane to the monumental. Peer learning and peer
production are probably as old as humanity itself, but they take on new
importance in the digital age.

The Peeragogy Project is an informal learning project with members
worldwide. Three members of the project share their welcoming messages
below.

**Paola Ricaurte Quijano**: Welcome to the Peeragogy Project! We are a
group of enthusiastic people who love to learn and are trying to find
the best ways to learn together.

**Lisa Snow MacDonald**: Welcome to peeragogy! It’s kind of a weird
name, but it’s enormously powerful in providing a fresh understanding of
ways of working together.

**Dorotea Mar**: Your contributions will be really welcome if you
participate respectfully and harmoniously with other peers. It can
change your life and improve your well-being and make everything better.

A Peeragogy Interview 
=====================

Introductions
-------------

**Paola Ricaurte Quijano**: Hi! I’m Paola, I’m from Ecuador. I work at
Tecnológico de Monterrey, a private university in Mexico City, and I
love to learn with everybody!

**Dorotea Mar**: Hello. I’m in Berlin now and I really like the
peeragogical atmosphere of collaboration and I think we are really
improving ways of collaboration and peer production, so that’s why I’m
here.

**Lisa Snow MacDonald**: Hello. This is Lisa from Los Angeles. My
background is media psychology and I’m interested in peeragogy as it
relates to business.

**LSM** I think what these things do is that they allow us to recognize
the value of connections. A lot of other ways of working are more
individualized. It goes back to a concept of 1 + 1 = 2, which is very
rational and very measured and is kind of a dominant way of thinking in
our society today, whereas peer to peer learning and production
recognize the value of those connections. You may not be able to measure
it with a yardstick, but we understand that there is value in those
connections. So it’s basically acknowledging that when it comes to
learning/collaborative environments if constructed the right way if
working well it can be 1 + 1 = 3 or 1 + 1 = 4. That type of situation,
which is really different from the way we’re used to thinking about
things. And I think that’s really the value of what we’re doing and the
potential of what we could hopefully unlock.

*Do you agree with Lisa? What else do the terms peer learning, peer
production, and peeragogy bring to mind for you? You can jot some
keywords here:*

**PRQ** This is a project that began spontaneously. We didn’t have a
plan at the beginning. We just talked about the things that concerned us
the most. What do you need if you want to learn with others, how to
learn better? what do you want to learn? Where do you want to learn?
When do you want to learn? Basic questions that can be answered in many
ways. We don’t have a strict line. We have a map, maybe, but a map that
can be walked through by many different paths. Paths that you choose can
be related to the people you are working with. I think it’s been a great
experience for us. As Lisa said, we have been recognizing the talents
and strengths of every person that has contributed to and participated
in this project.

*What are some of the things you’re concerned about that brought you
here?*

**LSM** The map analogy that Paola just mentioned is really good. It’s
not about providing a direct path. If you’re on a trip trying to get
from LA to Chicago, there are many paths you can take. What’s important
is making sure you’re monitoring your resources and you’re taking care
of things along the way. You can drift off-course. One plus one can
equal zero if things don’t work out well. So, what peeragogy and the
Peeragogy Project can do is to provide some structure and framework
around the unstructured way that things can be done. People trying to
make sure their methods are constructive and beneficial now have some
guidelines and things to watch out for.

* * * * *

Example: Howard Rheingold Grows a Learning Network
--------------------------------------------------

“When I started using social media in the classroom, I looked for and
began to learn from more experienced educators. First, I read and then
tried to comment usefully on their blog posts and tweets. When I began
to understand who knew what in the world of social media in education, I
narrowed my focus to the most knowledgeable and adventurous among them.
I paid attention to the people the savviest social media educators paid
attention to. I added and subtracted voices from my attention network,
listened and followed, then commented and opened conversations. When I
found something I thought would interest the friends and strangers I was
learning from, I passed along my own learning through my blogs and
Twitter stream. I asked questions, asked for help, and eventually
started providing answers and assistance to those who seemed to know
less than I. The teachers I had been learning from had a name for what I
was doing — “growing a personal learning network.” So I started looking
for and learning from people who talked about HOW to grow a “PLN” as the
enthusiasts called them.”

* * * * *

**DM** I think I do a lot of peeragogy and I’m very happy about it
because I learn so much from my group and from myself in this group that
I like to apply it to other projects that I’m in or things like
co-working and co-living projects. Especially the principle of mutual
respect that still remains after a very long time. And the way we relate
to each other is really nice.

The main principle is mutual respect and openness, and the process. And
in each detail, there is value that we believe in.

Let’s say how we manage the Peeragogy Page or Community (See “How to Get
Involved,” later in this chapter.). These seem to be details, but
they’re actually really important. So if we pay attention to all these,
every little thing matters, and this is how I do it. I try to be very
mindful in all interactions.

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Peeragogy/Peeragogy.github.io/master/images/talking.jpg)

*How do you do peeragogy? Can you think of examples that worked well,
and others that didn’t work as well?*

* * * * *

Example: Learner, know thyself.
-------------------------------

When he joined the Peeragogy project in 2012, Charles
Jeffrey Danoff did a brief self-evaluation. What makes Charlie
interested in learning?

1.  Context. As a student, I resisted being groomed for some
    unforeseeable future. I’d rather work toward a specific goal.

2.  Timing and sequence. I find learning fun when I’m studying something
    as a way to procrastinate another pressing assignment.

3.  Social reinforcement. Getting tips from peers on how to navigate a
    snowboard around moguls was more fun for me than my Dad showing me
    the proper way to buff the car’s leather seats on chore day.

4.  Experiential awareness. In high school, it was not fun to sit and
    compose a 30-page reading journal on Frankenstein. But owing in part
    to those types of prior experiences, I now find writing pleasurable
    and it’s fun to learn how to write better.

**PRQ** I think peeragogy is more like a mind-set. I think we have to
change the way we interact with others and the way we understand the
parameters of learning. For example, I’m a teacher and, of course, my
teaching practice promotes collaborative, creative learning. So, I
expect my students to take responsibility for their own learning by
making decisions about most aspects of the learning process; to program
their own learning goals. They need to learn to effectively employ the
environments (like whiteboards), the activities, and the assessments.
I’m trying to give my learners the tools to decide how, what, and why
they want to learn. For me, it’s been a very interesting experience.
Learners often find it unfamiliar to make their own decisions about the
process in a formal environment. At the beginning of the semester,
students are given everything and usually just follow guidelines and
criteria. I have been trying to change this dynamic. Students feel
insecure, because they really do not know how or what they want to do.
So, that process of making decisions together becomes very rich and
meaningful.

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Peeragogy/Peeragogy.github.io/master/images/footprints.jpg)

* * * * *

Example: Metacognition and Mindfulness
--------------------------------------

“What (exactly) are you doing? Can you describe it precisely? Why are
you doing it? How does it fit into the solution? How does it help you?
What will you do with the outcome when you obtain it?”[^1]

* * * * *

**DM** I think I’m always practicing it. I really like that during the
weekly hangouts we don’t usually have rigid agendas. We just get
creative and let ideas connect and flow. And whatever happens it’s the
right thing. We just work together and somehow the right things happen.
I think we’re always doing peeragogy when we pursue activities and
projects in open, collaborative ways without imposing too much structure
or hierarchy. There are many collaborative projects that aim to do
something similar to this, but, in a sense, focus on different aspects
of the process, and maybe not on such an abstract level as we might.
Some people have natural peeragogical tendencies, and some people are
less transparent in the way they do things. For me, peeragogy is really
beneficial, especially for collaborative projects. Everybody works and
learns differently, so if everyone became increasingly aware of how they
and others work and learn, of how peergogy functions, and how it all
fits into a bigger picture, many tasks would not only be more
efficiently done, but also much more enjoyable. It’s also beneficial if
everyone focusses on a bigger picture instead of focussing only on their
part of it, and if attention is drawn to all that could be done in a
peeragogical way.

*Do you agree with Dorotea? What challenges might come up in your
peeragogical journey?*

* * * * *

Example: Jay Cross on Setting Sail
----------------------------------

“If I were an instructional designer in a moribund training department,
I’d polish up my resume and head over to marketing. Co-learning can
differentiate services, increase product usage, strengthen customer
relationships, and reduce the cost of hand-holding. It’s cheaper and
more useful than advertising. But instead of just making a copy of
today’s boring educational practices, build something based on
interaction and camaraderie, perhaps with some healthy competition
thrown in. Again, the emphasis should always be on learning in order to
do something!”

* * * * *

**PRQ** Why? Well, as said before, I believe in peeragogy. I believe
it’s a good way to learn. Maybe it’s the best way. I think I wasn’t
aware of that before joining the group. I have always been a
self-learner, I have been working mostly alone. After I began working
with the group, I understood that you grow working with a group. You
achieve things that you aren’t able to achieve alone.

I think there’s a growing awareness of the value of collaboration in
every setting and environment. There are more and more learning
communities around the world where people are also learning that making
decisions together and working together are the best way to be in this
world! I think as we live through hard times, we increasingly need a
sense that we are not alone and that we cannot solve problems alone.

**PRQ** After taking Howard Rheingold’s course on Mind Amplifiers in
2012 we were invited to join this group. There was no plan, just an open
question of how to best learn with others. That’s how it began. We had lots of sessions and discussed a wide range of issues. The Peeragogy Handbook (http://peeragogy.org) was the product
of that process. We’ve been working with the Handbook, releasing a new
version every year and trying to figure out what might be the best way
to go forward and what the future of our collaboration as a group/team
might be.

**LSM** A couple friends of mine were involved in P2P learning. They
were invited to a conference at UCI. Howard was at the event and they
were familiar with him and his work. We ended up in an obscure classroom
and he started talking about principles that were peeragogy related,
while I don’t know if it provided much value to my friends, it sounded a
lot like what I saw in business and he mentioned the group. So after
that, I met everyone here and it’s been pretty random.

**DM** I think many paths led to my involvement. I have a lot of
academic experience and was doing research on Open Science. I had always
wanted to improve the way things work and somehow I wanted to do it more
creatively. I resonated a lot with the Peeragogy Project on many levels,
so somehow I just joined, I think it was serendipity of some kind.

Paola, Dorotea, and Lisa were interviewed by Charlie on December 15th,
2014. The transcript was significantly edited. You can watch the whole
interview online at <http://is.gd/peeragogyworkbook_interviews>. (49
Minutes)

We’ve given you some examples and questions to think about. Here’s one
more really useful exercise. Pick at least one thing you’re good at and
one thing you want to improve on from the selection below (or write in
your own alternative answers):

* * * * *

Exercise: How do you see yourself fitting in? 
=============================================

Potential roles in your peer-learning project 
---------------------------------------------

-   Worker, Team Member, Co-Manager, Manager, Co-Leader, Leader

-   Reviewer, Editor, Author, Content Creator,

-   Presenter, Designer, Graphic Artist, Technologist

-   Attendee, Participant, Coordinator, Planner

-   Mediator, Moderator, Facilitator, Proponent, Advocate,
    Representative, Contributor, Activist

-                                                                                                 

Potential contributions
-----------------------

-   Create, Originate, Research, Aggregate

-   Develop, Design, Integrate, Refine, Convert

-   Write, Edit, Format

-                                                                                                 

Potential motivations
---------------------

-   Acquisition of training or support in a topic or field;

-   Building relationships with interesting people;

-   Finding professional opportunities through other participants;

-   Creating or bolstering a personal network;

-   More organized and rational thinking through dialog and debate;

-   Feedback about performance and understanding of the topic.

-                                                                                                 

How-To Get Involved in the Peeragogy Project 
============================================

Write to the Peeragogy Project:

c/o Pierce Press PO Box 206 Arlington, MA 02476

Join a Google Hangout after connecting with us on
Google+: <https://plus.google.com/+PeeragogyOrgHandbook>

Or jump into our live chat: <https://gitter.im/orgs/Peeragogy/rooms>

There are lots of ways for peers to contribute. Here’s our current “Top
Seven” list:

1.  Site: **Google+ Peeragogy Handbook page**
    -   What happens: Discussion, news, meeting announcements
    -   Who’s in charge: Charlotte Pierce & Charlie Danoff
    -   <https://plus.google.com/+PeeragogyOrgHandbook>
    -   Status: Active
1.  Site: **Peeragogy mailing list**
    -   What happens: Meta-level coordination for the project, main point of contact with the email-o- sphere
    -   Who’s in charge: Joe Corneli
    -   <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/peeragogy>
    -   Status: Active
1.  Site: **Peeragogy.org**
    -   What happens: Maintain the “master” copy of the peeragogy handbook, share public news about the project.
    -   Who’s in charge: Peeragogy Project
    -   <http://peeragogy.org>
    -   Status: Active[^2]
1.  Site: **Google Drive Peeragogy Work Folder**
    -   What happens: Hive editing, working drafts to be delivered elsewhere when they are finished or for final polishing.
    -   Who’s in charge: Peeragogy Project
    -   <http://is.gd/peeragogydrive>
    -   Status: Active
1.  Site: **Peeragogy In Action Google+ Community**
    -   What happens: Random posts related to Peeragogy, quick communications between members, news about events, hangouts, etc
    -   Who’s in charge: Everyone
    -   <http://goo.gl/4dRU92>
    -   Status: Active
1.  Site: **Peeragogy YouTube Channel**
    -   What happens: videos posted here
    -   Who’s in charge: Charlotte Pierce
    -   <http://is.gd/peeragogyvideos>
    -   Status: Active
1.  Site: **Git.io/Handbook**
    -   What happens: versioned storage of the LaTeX sources for the print version of the handbook and other derived formats and scripts
    -   Who’s in charge: Joe Corneli
    -   <http://git.io/Handbook>
    -   Status: Active

Please don’t worry about rules or trying to catch up! Just jump in! :)
“Peeragogy Workbook v1.1” © 2015-2016 by the Peeragogy Project. All
rights dedicated to the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Zero
license. You can view the license online at
<https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>.

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Peeragogy/Peeragogy.github.io/master/images/napkin-drawings)

[^1]: Schoenfeld, A. H. (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition?
    In A. H. Schoenfeld (Ed.), Cognitive science and mathematics
    education (pp. 189-215). Hilldale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

[^2]: See <https://github.com/Peeragogy/Peeragogy.github.io> for the
    “behind the scenes”.
